Title: Want to be a Data Analyst? Learn These Skills w/ Luke Barousse

Description: What skills should you learn when studying to be a Data Analyst?

Join me with data legend Luke Barousse to discuss where you should focus your time.

Is it Python? Is it SQL? Is it Excel? Is it Power BI?

Listen to find out üëÄ

Connect with Luke Barousse:
ü§ù Connect on Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/luke-b/
‚ñ∂Ô∏è Subscribe on Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/c/LukeBarousse
üìä [Datanerd.tech](http://Datanerd.tech) : https://datanerd.tech/


Timestamps:

03:42 - Analyzing 1.2M data jobs (DataNerd.tech)
06:21 - The most important data skills 
12:13 - More senior skills 
22:52 - Data job titles 


Video Transcript:
if you're looking to become a data
analyst the amount of things that you're
told that you're supposed to know is
overwhelming you're supposed to know
Excel you're supposed to know python
you're supposed to know R you're
supposed to know powerbi you're supposed
to know Tableau supposed to know SQL all
the different flavors of SQL you know
linear programming this and linear
algebra that and calculus and it's so
overwhelming and it's so stressful and
that's why we did this interview today
with Luke baru we talked about what
skills you actually need to know to land
a data job if you guys have heard me
talk in my webinar about the SPN method
or even on the podcast skills portfolio
Network when it comes down to the skills
one of the best things you can do to
succeed is to simplify the amount of
skills that you need to learn and so we
talk about what are the top three skills
you need to learn as a data analyst
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith my guest
today is the legendary Luke barus you
know him from his amazing data content
on YouTube he's a former Navy submarine
officer tered data analyst he's worked
as a data analyst for one of the largest
chemical companies in the world BASF and
one of the biggest creators in the world
aka Mr Beast on YouTube so Luke welcome
to the show heck yeah thank you for
having me on I'm super stoked about it
when we reached B I was like dude I'm
super stoked about this I haven't talked
to you in forever so this is going to be
a little good chitchat session we're
going to have yeah for sure just for
reference you guys if you guys haven't
seen Luke's Channel on YouTube check it
out we'll have a link in the description
down below I think Luke and I met a
little bit over a year ago I had seen
his videos on YouTube previously but we
met at like a data Creator Meetup in
Austin Texas and then in my hometown of
Sol Lake City Utah a couple months later
and you guys Luke is just as nice as he
seems on YouTube it was one of the
coolest he's a great I don't know about
that but shout out to Ken G cuz Ken G
was the one that coordinated all and put
us in touch and I saw your video with
Kenji for the first time I was like oh
my gosh I got to meet Avery so I was
like super stoked to see you whenever
you were there in Austin and get to meet
you for the first time and been friends
since yeah and I'm super glad to have
you on the podcast first time on the
podcast today I really want to talk to
you about something that you actually
made obviously your YouTube videos
there's lots of really cool things but
you've built something really awesome
and I don't think enough people are
really talking about it and that is it's
called Data nerd. te and if you guys
haven't check this out you know pause
the YouTube video pause the podcast and
go check out data nerd. Tech we'll have
a link in the description down below as
well but can you explain what this data
nerd. Tech thing is yeah definitely so
first what it is it's an aggregation of
job postings to show what are the top
skills for data nerds so data scientists
data Engineers data analysts business
analysts and so that's what it does and
it shows those top skills but really
it's trying to solve a problem and so I
noticed whenever I got into this content
creation and trying to share insights
about you know what top skills learn
everybody had like these different
skills that they were recommending not
saying they weren't wrong but I mean
somebody would be like Excel SQL Tableau
and then somebody else would be like
python powerbi camp and it's like you
never we never had any consistency
around like so what is the top skill
based on like you know we work in data
like aren't you going to provide some
data around what is that's top skill so
I was always aggravated by that and
there's no really data out there if you
stack over float as a survey of this for
software developers where they share
these different type of skills but
that's software developers we need it
for data nerds so I decided hey we're
gonna go out and do it on himself so I
teamed up with this this API service
called Ser API they gave me a bunch of
free credits and basically built out
this pipeline for getting those
different job insights on a daily basis
for these types of data science roles
around the world and then I run it
through a a pipeline to extract out all
those different skills and then display
it in data nerd. to show what is the top
skills you should be learning based on
the job title and also on your
location yeah so you undersold that 100%
because what what you built is freaking
amazing it's basically like Luke said
it's basically
the skill it's telling you what skills
you need to learn in order to get the
job that you want so I'm actually G to
pull it up so those of you guys who are
watching either on YouTube or shout out
to Spotify with the video podcast will
be able to see this right here but
basically if you guys go to data nerd.
Tech it allows you to choose a do job
title for instance data analyst and then
it will go ahead and display what the
top skills are for those data analyst
positions and what Luke's done is he's
web scraped 260 1,000 data analyst jobs
and seeing you know what keywords what
tools are mentioned in those job
descriptions so it's really like a data
driven way to actually see what you're
supposed to be learning in order to land
a job it's but it's based off of data
right right and it's all like I mean
probability right so obviously SQL you
probably need to learn that as a data
analyst as the number one skill and I'm
sure a can say that's the top skill he's
he's probably used as well so yeah it's
just so crazy and then you can also sort
right there to see like hey I want to
dive into languages tools or databases
see what's the most popular yeah and I
think this this aspect is probably the
most valuable for those entering I'm
hoping to develop it more into the
future so it is real-time job collection
right so like it collected jobs just
this morning but I don't have a filter
for for recently right so this has been
collecting jobs for the past six months
so I'm hoping to build that out more
there's a lot of different design
features I like to build into this but I
need help with it that so yes that's
awesome that's really cool because
you're like yes I could totally do more
to it but one thing I always try to tell
my students is just get a minimal viable
product out there like it doesn't have
to be perfect like this is this is not a
perfect tool but it's very useful in the
meantime
right yeah that's such a good topic
about MVP and like I probably should
have put this out like a month or two
before but I just kept on like trying to
add an additional little thing that I
found out was actually pretty useless
because this main page which I built
within like a few weeks was the best so
exactly to your point and focus on the
MVP just get it out there and then
iterate from there yeah just to give
some Luke some credit here so far this
is web script 1.3 million data jobs so
this is like a pretty robust data set
that that he's created of all sorts of
different jobs you know you can go up
here and look at senior data analyst
roles versus regular data analyst roles
and one thing I really like because I
help a lot of people land data analyst
roles is looking at the data analyst
skills so you will see like Luke said
that that SQL is out of 48% which
basically means half of data analyst
jobs are going to require SQL the next
most common one is excel at 30 basically
34% python at 30% Tableau at 25% and
powerbi at 19.9% so those run out the
top five and then I guess R is probably
the six and then it kind of dropped off
dramatically after that with SAS and
PowerPoint and stuff like that yeah yeah
like it's really like the top six that
pretty much make up the the data stack
for a data analyst and then just sort of
not really related to that website but I
mean it's much like like learn Tableau
or powerbi Learn Python or R and then
you can shift as necessary to the other
one because they're I mean once you have
the skills in one you can shift to the
other yeah like powerbi and Tableau are
so similar that if you've learned one
you'll be able to figure out the other
and then I don't think Python and are as
are as similar but they do basically the
same thing so if you have one whatever
you can do in Python you okay hold on
whatever you can do in R you can do in
Python whatever you can do in Python you
can't necessarily do an R but a lot of
the data stuff you can do so but you
understand especially if you I started
an r and you once you understand the
basics of coding and programming yeah
and you can stop doing these piping
symbols you can move over to Python and
you know really unlock a lot of
different other things R is great for
statistical analysis not gonna not
saying it's bad I just like to I like to
move Beyond statistics so that's why I
like python yeah I'm with you as well
I'm a python guy as well one thing I do
want to point out though that it's not
like Miss leading necessarily with this
graph because obviously this graph is
data driven but but Python's high and
when I when I talk to people I tell them
you have to learn SQL you have to learn
Excel and then Python's not the third
thing I tell them to learn I tell them
to either learn Tableau or powerbi the
majority of the time Tableau just
because it's more accessible has a
stronger Community but if you take the
percentages and this is a little fuzzy
math you can't really do this math but
basically if you add these together
you'd end up with basically 45% and that
bi tool that data visualization bi tool
would actually become the second most
useful tool just after SQL right right
no I completely agree I I mean I agree
with that reasoning as well plus I mean
powerbi you could probably learn it
within a week to learn the basics python
I mean I've been at it for five six
years now and I'm still learning stuff
in Python so yeah it's gonna take a lot
longer with that so I like G advice with
that yeah I love python it's my favorite
data tool but like when you're just
getting started it's like you're
investing your time right you're
investing your money in something that's
going to pay out someday but it's just
like a decade down the road versus if
you invested in Tableau you could get
you could probably double your
investment in like a month basically huh
yep case in point one of my first data
analyst jobs like I'm studying python on
the side and I didn't know powerbi at
the time but the at our work we needed
this like powerbi solution built because
we needed a dashboard so over the
weekend learn powerbi built a dashboard
or whatever but I'm like and I kept on
trying to get like use cases for python
within my job and it coming but
everybody kept on coming to me for like
how can we build this dashboard now so
at least in the data analytic space I I
just find like the dashboarding
solutions can be a lot more quicker to
provide benefit and value and also get
you recognition and thus help you with
like accelerating your job growth yeah I
mean the Python's way sexier right it's
like much cooler but most businesses are
at a place where like they don't even
have like the basic graphs charts
dashboards reports that they need to
really be data driven so before they
even Explore you know more complicated
python automation cool stuff like
there's huge wins to be made with just
like take this Excel table and make it
visual because we as humans like to see
things versus read things right like
that's huge and doing that in you know
one of these bi tools is is so powerful
I wanted to ask you was there anything
like when you're putting this web app
together this dashboard together was
there anything that kind of shocked you
and you're like wow I never really
expected that result or like I never
really thought that that was very
popular or I thought this was super
popular and it wasn't like what was the
most surprising thing when you're going
through all of this data I never
realized how I mean we talked about a
little bit with SQL but when we just
focused a lot on data analyst but that
python squl combo is such a powerful
combo and if you look at data engineers
and also data
scientists like that it's the top two in
in those as well and so I I think a lot
of people as they progress in their care
careers they may find out they more
interested in data science becoming a
data scientist or data engineer so
that's why I think it's good to like
learn those those two skills as well on
that python skill so that way if you
want to like okay I'm not really about
building these dashboards I want to
build pipelines because that's something
also I discovered during this I'm like I
mean I like analyzing data but I also
like building pipelines and building
data pipelines and so that's more of a
data engineering role and so by knowing
that Python and seal combo you can do
those type of things yeah okay so the
biggest takeaway was just like holy crap
like obviously you know using Excel
using these bi tools is really fun for
analyzing data but once you become more
of the data engineer the data scientist
base it's really down to the SQL in
Python that that's where the money's
made I guess at that point yeah yeah
exactly okay that makes sense and it is
pretty cool though that like even SQL
which is like I just made a Tik Tok the
other day like squel explained in 60
seconds did explain everything no but
like SQL actually I was gonna say SQL
actually isn't that complicated it's
actually kind of an oxymoron because SQL
is both extremely complicated and not
complicated at all it just depends on
how in depth you want to go but like
right SQL for the most point for data
analyst is not that difficult and it's
cool because you could be learning squel
in you know a couple weeks and then
you're going to be using that the rest
of your career in whatever role you're
in like it could be like a bunch of
different roles and you're still going
to be using SQL which which is pretty F
powerful in my mind it's like one one
skill to rule them all
yes and I don't think people understand
the like the power behind it I mean just
in general right like say you have this
large data set that can't even like fit
on your personal computer yeah right
normally you're using the SQL code to
send to some server like Google or
Amazon or whoever else is running and
you're sending the SQL code and it's
doing this query to provide you the data
you need so sql's so good at uh
filtering down and getting the data you
need and then getting it onto your
computer the smaller machine and only
the data that you need and having that
skill set of just getting the data you
need like all of the data I mean it
speeds up visualizations it speeds up
workflows it's just so powerful and so
underrated because it's so
ugly it is but I mean it's also I mean
ugly but it's just so simple right it's
just like you read it you're like oh it
does this like this is you know it's not
as like it's not as pretty as python but
Python's also harder to learn because it
is pretty so yeah python like maybe
looks more elegant but it's probably
harder to read like sequel's kind of
like caveman language select this from
this like it's very straightforward yes
a powerful caveman language and python
is like the English uh Monarch uh
Python's 32 years old which I was like
wow I didn't realize how old python was
and squl is 49 so not quite double but
anyways I was surprised that they were
so close I would have thought python was
a little bit newer than that okay
shifting gears a little bit still
talking about this awesome data set that
you've collected over the last few
months we talked about the skills you
know I'm All About Learning SQL learning
Excel learning a bi tool I choose
Tableau let's talk about titles a little
bit because that's something that's uh
kind of whack in the data world we
talked about data engineer data
scientist and data analyst which are
kind of these clear-cut data roles
but throughout this data did you find
that those roles were indicative of what
the job descriptions were or was it kind
of messy how did you guys find these job
roles yeah that's funny so the first
time talking about an MVP that actually
did
launch that job title slicer filter
right there it's nice and clean now it
has like nine selections from like you
said data analyst a senior data analyst
software Engineers or whatever but those
job titles originally come coming from
indeed LinkedIn all the different J
platforms are so dirty and so ugly so
it' be like UPS success manager data
analytic manager or something um and
then you know it'll be like data analyst
lead two it's like two like what I don't
there's not Le so basically come to say
there's a there was a bunch of different
tons of different job titles and so when
I initially made this dashboard I had
all those different ones and some of
them did say like data analysts but it
was a very select group so that was like
the first major complaint I got like bro
this this this thing's great but they
have so many useless job titles in here
so actually I just used a hugging face
is like a website online that you can go
in and steal not steal you can go in and
use machine learning different machine
learning libraries and you don't have to
develop on your own so I don't really
know that too much about them I just
know that hey I can Implement them into
different pipelines and I used a
basically a classification model to go
through and classify whether based on
these different job titles and this uity
it went through and said okay this is
probably with 75% uh certainty this is a
data analyst role this is a you know
data engineering role based on it so
yeah so I'm using that on a daily basis
to go through and clean up those job
titles and help better identify and
streamline which ones fit into where but
it goes into your point like data that
you get especially the real data you get
is so dirty and you got to do there's so
much more that needs to be cleaned to
this data set yeah and I think that's
really fascinating because you're having
a machine learning algorithm kind of
automatically you know classify this
whack job title as a data analyst or
data scientist or a data engineer or
whatever right but we as humans
especially these job Seekers they have
to kind of do that machine learning on
their own because a lot of these times
these titles are are either one weird
two wrong three make no sense like
you'll see like a data science analyst a
lot of the time and I'm like what the
heck is that like is data they don't
they basically just don't know what they
want like we we want both yeah or I
don't know if I've seen this one a data
analytics scientist my friend is a I
think he's a data engineer scientist but
like he works for an engineering company
who doesn't really know what they're
doing so I think that's why they have it
but my point here is for people
listening when you're looking at jobs
you have to be running this machine
learning algorithm in your head and that
means you have to be reading the job
description because like there's a lot
of roles that are going to be say that
they're data analyst roles they're not
data analyst roles or there's gonna be a
lot of roles that you know don't even
have the word data or don't even have
the word analyst in there but if you
look what they're actually doing they
might be doing data analytics I don't
know if you actually saw that in your
data set were there roles that didn't
say data and analytics yeah right I mean
it's I think the common offender is like
they say they want a data scientist and
then you look at the role it's like no
they want a data analyst they don't need
somebody like trained in machine
learning algorithms or to do you know
complex AB testing right they need
somebody using Excel and powerbi or
whatever and that's a data analyst so
frequently it's the HR issue where they
just don't know how to label the job
correctly yeah I actually had you know
I'm sure you have weird instances like
this with your obviously your big
YouTube following but I actually had a
an owner of a car company I guess not a
car company like a like a Honda like a
sales what what is that place called
like where you where you buy a car I
don't know a Car Center yeah a
dealership a car dealership there we go
he reached out to me and he's like hey I
want to hire a data person will you take
a look at like my job description that I
wrote and it was like the weirdest job
description ever and also he said it was
hiring a data scientist and I was like
you don't have like any data scientist
qualities on here it's really a data
analyst and also the salary that you're
looking at there is probably more toward
a data analyst Q was like I said like a
small business but like that happens
more often than you realize which is so
weird just make sure you're reading the
job description and you're trying to
figure out what the job is and don't let
the title you know scare you a lot of
them are going to like I said like a
qualitative researcher is often a data
analyst job you know Financial analysts
could be a data analyst job it really
just depends do you have like a certain
like rule that you would go about like I
would say probably if you have like 60
to 70% of the skills on there right then
I would probably apply for that job you
probably fit the need
yeah I think especially with the written
like requirements I love that the
companies now are kind of doing like the
requirements and then like the makes you
a good candidate makes you like an
All-Star candidate and has like
different bullets based off of those so
it's like they're not all just listed as
requirements but a lot of times these
recruiters and hiring managers put their
requirements as their wish list but like
unicorn of a data person there's not
very many of them and if they do exist
that salary is way too low for them a
lot of the time right yes so yeah I
think between you know 50 is maybe a
little pushing it but like 50 to 70
obviously if you fit 100% apply for it
but yeah somewhere in that like 60%
range I think is is a good place to
apply to that job anyways I I have a
funny story for you want to hear it yeah
let's hear it this is gonna be a
separate podcast so shout out to this
future podcast episode but I obviously
run a boot camp and I have a lot of
students in the boot camp and I was like
man I want to see what it's like to see
one of my students you know job
application submissions right so I was
like all right I'm gonna actually post a
job on LinkedIn and have all my students
go apply for it and we'll just see how
like their resume gets you know read in
how they get ranked by the the ATS yeah
super fun so I posted it on LinkedIn but
unfortunately there's no like setting in
LinkedIn where it's like this is a
private job listing it's like a public
job listing okay so you got a bunch of
other people as well yeah but I didn't
want to waste people's time that was not
my intention right so in the job
description full paragraph starting with
a red stop sign in bold all caps I said
do not apply to this job this is not a
real job application don't apply to this
job this is just a test this is only for
my boot camp students how many
applications do you think I got oh how
long did you have it listed for well it
got taken down by LinkedIn about after
48 hours oh man I don't know like a
couple thousand few thousand just shy
yeah like 700 or something like that oh
my good goodness okay and gosh that like
that's crazy how many people looking
right oh well that's unfortunately
didn't read the job description but I
mean I can sort of get it if you're Mass
applying you may miss it but oh gosh I
know yeah I guess the easy apply was I
think it was an easy apply job on link
could just apply to it but man I mean it
was the first thing you'd see so anyways
read the job description just in case
there's any fake people like me out
there but also to actually see what type
of job this is let's move on to salaries
because that's another thing that you
cover here in the data nerd. Tech
anything in particular that you learned
on salaries yeah I didn't I didn't
realize before this I sort of would put
it I thought I would thought to myself
okay data scientists are the highest and
then and data scientists are the highest
in the amount of quantity and data
science are the highest in the amount of
salary then it would be next data
engineers and Then followed by data
analyst I was blown away about one how
data Engineers there's more more
openings for it and there's typically
higher salary for it too and there's
higher salary for it because if you look
at the skills to I see data Engineering
in general requires a lot of different
specializations and a lot of different
skills working with not only data tools
but also cloud-based tools so I really I
mean especially as a fan of data
engineering shout out to Seattle de guy
and Shashank they you know they have so
many different skills and they're
working with so many things things I'm
like it made me have an appreciation a
better appreciation backed by data of
data
Engineers yeah I totally respect that I
think the data engineer is such an
interesting position because it's so
needed because before you do I mean
these are the people that are getting
prepping the data storing the data
organizing the data cleaning the data
for everyone else to use Downstream and
if you don't have good data that's easy
to access that's clean you can't really
do that much so they're so needed but
like you said I think it's the hardest
like if you just look at barriers to get
into the data field I think the data
engineer is the highest like I don't
really hear very many like I
self-studied and became a data engineer
it's hard software skills computer
skills programming skills to land those
jobs it's a high high barrier to entry I
think yeah I will give an exception to
that I was interviewing people for the
Google D anal certificate and one of the
guys I interviewed from Mexico was it
got a did the Google dead analy
certificate and then got a engineer job
immediately and I'm like what what I was
like what how did you do this and well
it was the company was new to setting up
their their you know they weren't like a
Facebook or a meta or whatever right it
was a a new company they were trying to
establish practices they were trying to
build out systems to better manage their
data and they just needed you know they
need they were starting from square one
and they wanted you know some some work
with this and I don't think he was paid
I mean I'm sure he was paid relative to
like a data analyst but he was able to
get into this data engineering role and
now focus more on that and then
obviously grow his skills so I think
it's a it's an option definitely if you
have the opportunity and you're
interested in that right I never in
Surge of people like you must go data
analyst definitely also consider that if
the opportunity presents itself at a
smaller company for sure for sure that's
very interesting that would be if I was
starting a company I think hiring in
fact a couple episodes ago we had Jesse
Morris who's basically been an executive
in the data field for a while and he's
hired a lot of people and he said one of
his first hires would be an experienced
data engineer and like a mid-level data
analyst he thinks that's like a killer
combination yes but when you're getting
started sometimes you can't afford like
these these data engineers get paid a
lot so you gota you got to start
somewhere okay one of the things that
you mentioned to me earlier when we were
talking was the idea of how you could
possibly make this tool better so what
are some things that are on your to-do
list to make this tool better like what
are you trying to look for are you
looking for help to make this tool
better because it's a really awesome
tool tell me more about like how you see
this evolving in the future yeah so I
think this has a lot of potential
there's so much more in the the data
that hasn't been explored one just Data
Insights you don't know what you don't
know and so there's a lot of insights in
the the job descriptions and stuff we
need to start pulling out I want to
actually get into more analysis of like
how AI is impacting these jobs and I've
only been able to do like a brief
analysis of it and I'm only one person
right now as far as developing the tool
further I can see other things as well
to where people can go in and we have
data now over six months like hey what
is the most recent top skill what is the
trending skill right now that I could
potentially focus on and advertise for
myself and then also being able to go in
and you know different Industries have
different tools that they're using some
Industries like are big on like SAS or
something for their uh Computing others
may not be doing that so there's a lot
to be done with this and I've had some
people reach out to me and got them to
start to help me or whatever but if
you're interested just shoot me a
LinkedIn message let me know like what
you be interested in exploring or
helping out with and I have this via a
private repository on GitHub and I can
get you access to it so you can start
doing whatever you want to do if you
want to work on the data analytics
analyzing the data to analyze some
insight if you want to help working
building out the web page itself or if
you want to work on the data engineering
side of it and helping build out the
pipeline itself I mean there's so many
different things and so many different
angles we could attack this from but I
just I need help with it I I love that
and very generous of you offer that one
thing I'll say Luke's a super nice guy
so he won't say this I'm not as nice as
Luke so I'll say it Luke's also a busy
guy and so what I would suggest is if
you reach out to Luke or anyone like
Luke is you don't just like message and
say hey I want to help you know like
come up with something that you'd like
to help with like yeah you know like one
of the easiest things and I mean if
you're really passionate about it send
Luke a message about it but like for
instance you're web scraping every day
right like you said like that probably
has a time stamp so even adding like a
little date filter slider at the top
that's something that's really easy to
do in streamlet you've built this in
Python using streamlet that's something
that's kind of like built into streamlit
that like we could probably add you know
and that's something you could say hey
Luke like I I noticed this is missing
like I think we could add this or this
is something I'd like to explore like
just come up with some sort of an idea
to to get going do you agree with that
no completely agree because like I've
been working with a guy named Jared Rand
he did in analysis into generative AI to
analyze the postings for had somebody
else recently reached out to me and to
see bias and job posting towards
non-english speakers which I was like I
didn't even think about this and he was
doing basically some statistical
analysis around our job postings bias
towards our biased towards non-english
speakers non-native English speakers and
I'm like huh this is pretty I didn't
even think about analyzing that he's
built out like a tableau dasboard and
everything so yeah there's so many
different ways you can look at it yeah
also if you're just not sure and you
just want to like look at the data set
itself I have something on kaggle that
is a subset of the data which is just
the United States data analyst job
postings it's on my CLE it's free it's
open source it's also updated daily and
you can go in and actually Analyze That
for data analyst in the United States
that's that's awesome and and so you
could always test out ideas kind of
there and then you know come back to
Luke and be like I did this I want to
try with the bigger data set like the
international or with the data scientist
that was an awesome episode I hope you
guys really enjoyed that hey in the show
notes down below we're going to have
Luke's LinkedIn as well as Luke's
YouTube definitely check out both of
those resources especially his YouTube
channel he makes fantastic videos we'll
also have the link to the data nerd. te
which will show you what skills you need
to learn in order to land different jobs
as well as a couple other cool things
that Luke's been looking into with the
1.2 million jobs that he's been web
scraping along this whole time I have
some free resources for you guys on your
data Journey as well in the show notes
down below so be sure to check those out
and as a reminder we're going to be
doing part two with Luke baru next week
where we're going to be talking about Ai
and data analytics Luke has some really
great thoughts on you know is AI going
to come for the data analyst world are
we going to lose job as data analysts I
won't spoil his answer tune in next week
to find out have a great week everyone

Title: How to Ace The Data Science & Analytics Interview w/ Nick Singh

Description: Join me with data interview expert Nick Singh to discuss how to ace your data science and analytics interviews, from preparation tips to tackling SQL technical questions, in this must-listen episode of the Data Career Podcast‚Äîyou won't want to miss it!!

Connect with Nick Singh:

ü§ù Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nick-singh-tech/
üìï  Buy Ace the Data Science Interview book: https://amzn.to/45Rskdo
üêµ DataLemur:https://datalemur.com/


Timestamps:
16:10 - üìä Best interview tips 
36:30 - üîÑ Mock interview practice 


Video Transcript:
if there's one guarantee in your data
career Journey it's this you will have
an interview you will want to do well in
this interview and you will be nervous
for this interview and in today's
episode I talk to data interview expert
Nick Singh we discuss what you can
expect in these data interviews how to
best prepare for them and how you can
really stand out to land that job offer
if that sounds interesting keep
listening welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job
here's your host Avery Smith alright you
guys my guest today is the one and only
Nick Singh he's worked in the data field
at Facebook at Google at Microsoft he is
the co-author of the best-selling book
how to Ace the data science interview I
have my copy over there it's absolutely
great he's the creator of data lemur
which is basically an online SQL
learning and practice platform and most
importantly he's a data meme expert and
super Drake fan Nick welcome to the
podcast
hey Ray thank you so much for having me
I'm really excited to break down a
little bit more about the interview and
how do we get those interviews in the
first place
awesome yeah you've done so much in your
data career right you've done so much in
such a little time but I really invited
you on here today to help me and help us
you know all the listeners learn more
about data interviews so I'd kind of
like to get an idea of the different
types of interviews you know maybe get
some best tips or list of potential
questions that you might get asked and
then maybe we'll do like a little quick
a little mock behavioral interview at
the end to test your abilities and test
my abilities and see how it goes but
firstly I just want to start with like
what different types of interviews are
there in the data world like what have
you seen from here yeah
so we have those behavioral interviews
that most people are probably familiar
with then when it comes to technical
interviews you might have a SQL screen
where they ask you some conceptual
questions about how SQL works or
different commands and that more
competitive fan companies like Facebook
Google and this it will actually have
you write SQL code on the spot either on
a whiteboard if this is happening in
person or they're going to send you a
coding assessment through a platform
like hacker rank or codility or code
signal where they're going to give you
two real SQL interview problems and have
you spend 45 minutes solving both of
them so you know you'll actually might
have to write code during the interview
and this happens for both data science
data analytics data engineering jobs bi
jobs you know you can all be expecting a
SQL screen
some rules also do coding screens where
you code in Python that's more the case
for some data science roles but a lot of
machine learning engineering roles data
engineering roles and of course software
engineering roles you're going to be
writing code on the spot again through
one of these hacker ranks codilities so
you've got coding screens you've got SQL
screens you've got behavioral interviews
you might also be asked a little bit
about statistics and probability I'm not
like crazy PhD level stuff but Basics
about hypothesis testing or confidence
intervals and P values you might be
asked to apply Bayes rule to us you know
to solve a problem with Bayes rule
you can also be you know expecting the
face a more open-ended almost case study
or you know I I hate using the word case
study just because that kind of means
something very specific in the
Consulting and business World they have
case interviews and like they have a
case method I mean in the data world
it's a little bit more loose what we
consider a case interview sometimes this
is happening in person where they'll
give you data to let you you know
analyze it for an hour and then they'll
talk to you about how do you analyze it
how did you explore it how did you clean
it what insights you found maybe this
happens through a take home somewhere
during the interview process where
they'll actually give you a few days
with the data set to go analyze it and
then sometimes there's not even a data
set to analyze in these case studies let
me give you a real example from Facebook
that they ask for data scientists and
data analysts at Facebook which is a
question like you know
what are the metrics you'd use to
measure the health a Facebook
Marketplace the app right Facebook
Marketplace is like a place where you
can buy and sell different Goods kind of
like Craigslist
you know what what would you be tracking
to make sure that your Marketplace is
healthy and of course here I mean
there's no data here it's more about a
back and forth conversation with your
interviewer just to talk about what
business metrics you think should be
tracked what kinds of problems do you
think the product might have around spam
how would we stop the spam how would we
measure the spam how could we maybe
build ml models to fight that spam so
it's really just a big open-ended
discussion so those are probably the
main types of interviews you'll face
when you're on that data analyst data
science job hunt okay awesome so
basically there's the behavioral
questions there's kind of like the SQL
online SQL in person sequel maybe like
some some python tests and then kind of
these oh the statistics questions and
then the case studies with data case
studies without data so maybe maybe
around seven different types so
basically it's complicated and that's
right why Nick wrote a whole book about
it so
um you guys can check that out we'll
have a link to it in the show notes down
below yeah
um actually I want to just say one thing
it's complicated because truth is
these data roles are different company
to company and what one company calls a
data scientist might be doing work that
another company calls
like might be doing data analyst work
right and you've got data Engineers who
are doing data science work and vice
versa so that's kind of why the
interview process is so wide because a
lot of the companies a lot of the hiring
managers they don't even know exactly
what they're hiring for or you know data
is still such a new role that
they just kind of throw a lot of
different things at you because they
themselves are not sure whether you need
machine learning or not yeah definitely
true we just interviewed Luke Bruce and
we talked about data job titles because
he's been web scraping he's web scraped
1.3 million data job titles and he's
like they're such a mess everyone has
different definitions of everything so I
really agree with that I will say like
one thing that's interesting is what you
said is true for all the positions right
like data analyst data scientists data
engineer like any one of those roles
could have any one of those types of
interviews I do think that the data
analyst interviews do skew a little less
intense than some of the data data
engineering ones do you agree
oh for sure because data analysts a
little bit more entry level and still a
little bit like less I would say hype
like people have been doing data
analysts job for quite some time versus
like titles like data science are still
new in a lot of orgs but people have
been doing bi analysts or data analyst
work for a long time and you know people
have been doing Excel tests for like the
last 30 years so data analysts it's a
little bit less crazy but you still can
expect a little bit about stats you can
still expect a little bit about
open-ended kind of case studies about
business metrics and product metrics and
yeah you might be asked some questions
about Excel and maybe just a little bit
about SQL but it's not as hardcore maybe
they just ask you some basic questions
there yeah and I think it's also really
good to point out like you said that
like not only are the roles different
but the interview process is different
for these different positions it's not
like one company interviews data
analysts the same as another they're all
going to have the different processes
and some might require you know a SQL
test but I've had a lot of students
inside of the data analytics accelerator
land jobs without doing a SQL test
whatsoever right so it really just
depends on on the process and also even
at some of the bigger companies now this
isn't true necessarily with like
Facebook and Amazon and Google like they
have a pretty standardized recruiting
process and hiring process but like for
instance when I got hired at Exxon Mobil
like my interview process was very
different from the next person that got
hired like right like sometimes from
just day to day the interview process
depending on who's interviewing you how
prepared they are all that good stuff
might be different so basically like you
said it can be pretty random of what the
experience might actually be and you're
right that there are definitely
companies who hire without a SQL test to
let you do SQL but I don't think that's
a good thing I don't think that's like
oh damn it I got no like dang I got
lucky because
that tells you a little bit about who
your co-workers might be or who your
hiring manager is versus a company where
they're a little bit more rigorous and
they you know they send you a coding
screen where you have to write these
things in 30 minutes that tells you like
oh they actually take SQL seriously and
it also tells you your co-workers your
manager
they're not just like random people been
promoted like they probably know how to
do SQL screens if they're going to be
the ones judging it or grading it or
requiring those skills of you so I
definitely would be wary I've seen this
with some people but we're like oh yeah
you know what Nick your book was too
crazy my job didn't ask me anything
technical it was just a behavioral it
was really easy and then they get into
the job and they're like oh I'm just
doing really simple stuff in Excel all
day and it's not for a lot of pay and
I'm like yeah because the jobs that pay
a lot where you need SQL they test SQL
kind of hard it'll just let you walk in
so you know it's a okay if you're trying
to break in but just something to be
cognizant about that I don't think
there's no free lunch there's no like oh
wow they're paying a lot and it's really
prestigious and it's really competitive
and they didn't even touch my technical
skills I fooled them that doesn't really
happen too much which is why the people
leading the pack with pay these fan
companies Facebook Googles and all
that's why they got the hardest
interviews so
yeah yeah no free lunch I think that is
true like the companies that pay the
most are often the most rigorous
interview process and I agree with what
you said I will push back a little bit
because we're going to talk about this
later about how you actually get good at
these interviews and the sure the answer
is you practice the interview questions
right and from my experience and keep in
mind that like a lot of my data roles
I've actually been in haven't really
been that SQL heavy right but like a lot
of the drills I've been in haven't even
been that SQL heavy and unfortunately I
just think that sometimes giving people
a timed test
is not the best way to judge them for
what type of employee they might be
right like I don't think I would test
that well with a SQL test because once
again I'm more of a python guy but even
with the python test like you're putting
yourself in an environment where I've
never really been on a time crunch I've
never really been not able to connect to
the internet right like like I've always
been able to have those resources so I
think it's often a really good way to
try to figure out like it's a weeder to
figure out like okay these people aren't
good these people are really good right
but I also think it's not necessarily
the best way to identify candidates oh
of course not when you're getting
thousands you have to do something to
limit it down so I understand the
purpose of it yeah
what you said is fair and just like
there's a way to interview well I talked
to hiring managers all the time and be
like yo your interview
process doesn't make sense why are you
grilling me on SQL if you need a person
who's doing Python and pandas exactly
alluding to your point right so just
like their skill in sitting for these
interviews hiring managers shouldn't
just blindly just oh let's just ask the
hardest stuff randomly because I heard
there might be machine learning it's
like I don't think my data analyst needs
to know machine learning right they can
be a kick-ass data analyst without that
so I definitely think there's an art to
it but still at some point you know the
military right they make you do push-ups
they make you do pull-ups that's what's
there for the Special Forces yeah I
don't think doing 20 pull-ups makes you
a really good you know Navy SEAL but I
mean there's a reason why all the tests
are around basic exercises so I think
SQL is the same way your job might be
much more complicated but sometimes
the thing we can test you is the
push-ups of data which is SQL and you
know maybe the sit-ups of data is
you know take home Challenge and
something like that right so you have to
have some standards but yeah I agree
it's not a perfect process that was a
good analogy I actually like that
because obviously when you look at the
military it's like when you're on the
front lines of a war zone you're not
doing push-ups right those are not the
exercises you're doing but those are
kind of an indicator of you know how you
might perform in those situations yeah
so I think I like that analogy that was
good
one thing I want to talk about is like
this idea of you know based off of these
different roles you might get different
things like for instance if you're
applying for a role that's like a bi
specialist and it's more focused on
Tableau instead of taking one of these
you know SQL tests you might have like a
take-home challenge where you're
creating a tableau dashboard based off
of some data they give you so it's not
like every role necessarily is going to
have the SQL the SQL challenge but a lot
of them do it is really really yeah oh
yeah
of course at some level you will be
grilled on this stuff and you're right
like if you're more database focused
person maybe they just ask you
conceptually things about how things
work into Blow maybe they make you show
your past dashboard and then Grill you
on it and how you developed it
I almost think of these as like not
really behavioral but like almost pseudo
technical where it's still about your
experience it's still stuff about your
resume but we're gonna go much more
deeper than just like telling me about
teamwork no we're gonna ask you oh you
built this dashboard how did you clean
the data where the data come from you
know what steps you've taken what was
weird with the data set that you needed
to clean out before you could display it
so these are like borderline technical
without you know straight up grilling
you on some random to blow function so
that's something else you can expect for
these data analysts and sometimes data
science job interviews
okay awesome I want to play a game with
you now where we we took turns giving
our best three interview tips let's say
maybe this is your first job or First
Data interview or maybe you're upgrading
from a data analyst to a data scientist
like give your first data science
interview I want to take turns going
through what our best three pieces of
advice is do you want to go first you
want me to go first I'll let you choose
I'll go first maybe well how about we do
one one right yeah yeah so maybe the
first one I do is know that it's a
conversation
people sometimes freeze up thinking they
have to give the exact right or answer
and they don't realize it's
conversational or maybe they just like
go silent without saying anything
especially for these more open-ended
questions it's a conversation if it's a
hard SQL question there's gonna be back
and forth where you ask some clarifying
questions or you walk them through the
thought process
so just don't freeze up realize you can
ask clarifying questions and realize
it's a conversation at the end of the
day yeah sometimes they'll specifically
say this like think out loud or talk out
loud about what you're thinking and even
if they don't say that especially if
you're not sure what to say or you don't
know the answer like walking through the
ideas that's coming in your brain shows
your problem solving skills and at least
can get you on the right path sometimes
you'll say something and they'll like
maybe make it easier for you or clarify
for you so I love that it's a
conversation you don't need to stay
silent you can like
speak your mind whatever you're trying
to think
yep exactly and if you blank on the
exact Excel function or SQL function you
need but you've talked it through
correctly they know that you can like go
Google it or if you're you know very
close but you forgot some small syntax
like they're happy with that as long as
you talk talk it out so yeah yeah that's
the added bonus I like that it's a great
great first pick my first pick is going
to be imagine that there's some sort of
a tool that would allow you to know what
they're going to ask I think that that
would be like a superpower be like oh my
gosh I already know what they're gonna
ask me to interview I'm going to drill
those things well in some places like
Google Facebook like some of the bigger
fan companies there's really good
resources like data lemur that will kind
of walk you through some practice
questions that are very similar to the
ones you'll be asked in the interview
but unfortunately none of us will work
for fan companies and there's not always
a standardized reason well I like the
resource glassdoor.com which allow you
to look up a company and then they have
a interview section of this like their
glass door Pro file which is basically
user collected interview questions that
people were asked when they interviewed
that company and you could actually
filter it down to the job level so for
example let's say you have an interview
coming up with you know Ford motor for a
data analyst position you can go to the
Ford motor page on Glassdoor go to the
interview questions search for data
analysts and see if there's any like
data analyst interview there'll be
questions and then also kind of like
summaries and and ratings and it'll help
you understand what type of questions
they might ask at Ford maybe even the
exact question so I like glassdoor.com
because it like gives you a little peek
into the future of what you might have
to expect that's a great tip I'm gonna
piggyback off of that for my next tip
which is
don't underestimate generality right so
like on data lemur we have a bunch of
questions along with the company that
asked the question and same way in the
201 questions in the book but what
actually happens is
companies keep coming back to the same
questions or there's some really really
common patterns that keep coming up so I
would still say that when you're doing
these questions think about the general
pattern that's happening for example one
question that keeps coming up is what
are some of the assumptions behind
linear regression along your underlying
data well
you see that question so much but when
you see it three times you might also
think your head huh what are some of the
underlying assumptions before I do a
logistic regression or some of my other
techniques right
so what actually happens is even if I
don't know like if I don't know a single
thing about what Ford Motor Company is
asking
if you do enough prep from some of these
other companies and you solve enough of
the questions and the questions are out
there they're 201 in my book there's
more than like 300 on my site you do
enough of them you start to realize oh
even a company I've never heard about or
talked to
they're asking about the same stuff you
know and there's only so many ways to
trick people on SQL and there's only
some and forget even trick like most
companies aren't even trying to trick
you they're just trying to see you like
I'll give you an example where versus
having yep I've been asked such a
classic one you've had that one yeah I
have cool my girlfriend she's a data
analyst she's had that one twice right
I've had that one once
um so it's like it doesn't even matter
what company is asking that that's like
one of the classic you know SQL
questions there versus having
so I think that's the other thing which
is like go look on Glassdoor go do these
things but just think about the patterns
because
again you'll see another one it's not as
common but it's like what's the
difference between order by and group by
I mean they're actually not very similar
commands but they both have the word Buy
in them so sometimes people get tricked
up like oh what but if you just think
for a second it's like wait they're not
even really related but that's again
like another one where it's like oh
suddenly you're asked to compare
contrast two different functions what's
rank versus dense rank it's a little bit
more hard of a question which might be
asked to a data engineer for example but
again just like that's the pattern take
two commands how are they similar and
how are they different boom you now know
like 90 of data analyst sequel interview
questions that don't involve code
they're just you know these conceptual
ones it's just comparing contrast two
different things I like that that's a
that's a great tip good second pick
with my second pick
I'm going with
you're supposed to bomb the first
interview just no like it's okay to bomb
the first interview it's okay like
you're going to fail like I don't have
math or stats on this about the amount
of people who land their first data job
with the First Data interview that they
get but I'm guessing it's not high so
I've actually had students before that
like work really hard to land that first
date interview get to that First Data
interview and then they get the
rejection email and they're bummed out
and I'm kind of like you're that's okay
like you're kind of supposed to get
rejected from the first interview that
you do just get the first one two three
interviews and just consider it practice
it's just like okay I'm practicing what
it's like to answer these questions I'm
practicing the high pressure the quick
answer being on video those types of
things so my tip here is gosh you're
supposed to fail and it's okay if you
did
yeah piggybacking off it's not my tip
but I just want to share the story I
wrote the book a severe science
interview because
I wasn't that good at interviews like if
if this stuff came to easy to me I
wouldn't have made my last two years all
about this I would have just moved on
with my life and just kept doing stuff I
got so hung up on this topic exactly
because I failed interviews and then I
realized there's questions and then I
realized oh wait the questions come in
certain patterns and I realized oh shoot
I don't have to keep failing I can just
practice a lot let me start practicing
oh wait this is working for me wait this
is working for others so I super Echo
that I didn't Ace my first like
interviews at all I bombed so many of
them which is literally why I wrote this
book is so that other people don't bomb
interviews like the way I did because
it's really common to do that especially
your first one no problem that's awesome
so you guys can know that even Nick who
wrote the book on the interview was bomb
in his first interviews
like a lot of them no even even well
into it I still get tripped up sometimes
on different things which is what makes
the book richer and what makes my
coaching abilities richer because even I
sometimes mess things up which is great
uh yeah you know I mess up SQL the order
of operations I just posted about it
yesterday on LinkedIn or two days ago
about sometimes I mix up where group buy
should go in the SQL query because you
know it's just like select from group by
so sometimes I mess up the order where
different things go within all that so
me too me too okay what's your third tip
let's see third tip is
at the end when they say do you have any
questions for me
definitely have questions pre-planned
ready to ask them
and make sure they're good make sure
they're well researched never just say
no I don't have questions and even if
you do have questions don't ask them
about pay or vacation time don't even
ask them generic ones like how do you
like working here because they've heard
that a million times
you go one step further like hey I was
reading your company blog and I saw this
were you working on that that seems
really cool or hey earlier you
introduced me you told me you're on X
team I was reading your earnings report
and I saw that exes are a really big
thing Focus for the company how's that
been or like you know just subtly show
them that like you know someone in the
company know something about the product
right or hey you know you work on why
feature I was actually poking around on
the app a few days ago and I actually
noticed why feature I was curious why
did you guys make that design decision
boom that's a subtle way you're asking a
question but that's a subtle way of
showing like damn you've done your
research you care about the company
you're passionate about the space you're
not just asking a generic oh
how do you like working here when you
know that you're gonna be like oh it's
great right like that's a stupid
question and a stupid answer and you
know yeah I love that I think the most
two guaranteed questions that you're
going to be asked in every interview is
tell us about yourself and do you have
any questions for us so it's like you
can prepare the crap out of those
because it's a guarantee you're gonna
get asked though so I love that and it
only takes one Google search too just
like Google like whatever company data
and just see like what pops up and read
the first article done
yup and the best part is sometimes you
go like yo this sounds too good to be
true what if I sound over prepared or
over rehearsed and I'm always just like
yo are you like a professional actor or
something like memorizing lines like
even if I do all the preparation I come
in the interview I get a little bit
nervous or you know my focus goes one
way or another like it's you're never
gonna sound over a harsh or over
prepared you're only gonna sound like
enthusiastic and passionate and like
someone who knows their so I'm
always a big fan of doing this kind of
prep work and not worrying that you're
gonna come off as some weird stalker
freak like it's never a thing I'll ask
personal questions too sometimes like
hey I saw on LinkedIn earlier like you
used to work in biotech before you came
into Tech you know I have a biotech
background I mean how's that been for
you right so suddenly they feel good too
like oh you looked at me on LinkedIn and
you saw you do biotech and then suddenly
they're like oh wow Nick you're also
from biotech background too let's
connect on that by the way this is
hypothetical I do not come from biotech
background but you know whatever common
point you have with them mention at some
point in the interview it's just like a
simple people human thing people like
people who are like them so just
mentioned that yeah 100 okay that was a
great tip with my last tip I'm going
with something that you kind of already
kind of hinted at but I call it flipping
the interview and it's the idea that a
lot of people who do the interview
process like the hiring manager or even
like a lead data person these guys are
busy people and of course they're doing
hiring
as part of their job description but
that's like the 20th thing on their job
description so a lot of the times they
don't really want to be doing the
interview they don't really come
prepared they spend five minutes 10
minutes beforehand thinking through what
questions they're going to ask you and
stuff like that from like a list
generated by HR or whatever and
basically a lot of people do interviews
and I know this because I've done
interviews before aren't the most
prepared people on planet Earth sure and
so they're kind of struggling to like
figure out what to ask you and so if you
can figure out a way where they aren't
going to ask you random questions that
they make up kind of on the spot but
instead they ask you about a project
that you've done it's going to put you
and them and so much more of a
comfortable situation where the
interviewer is not going to have to be
like struggling to like try to figure
out the next question they're like oh
you just submitted this project as part
of your cover letter or like in the cold
message you sent right just tell me more
about this like why'd you build this
project what made it so interesting you
know why did you do this versus that and
all of a sudden instead of answering you
know know what the four underlying
assumptions of linear regression are
which is always super hard for me to
remember I'm talking about something I
really know and really enjoy and that's
so much a better experience it's going
to put me at ease I'm going to have
better answers so if you can use
projects to kind of flip the interview
and actually make the interview about
stuff you've already done not about
stuff that random knowledge you have in
your head I think it's a lot better of
an experience for everyone that's
amazing answer and actually I totally
endorse that chapter two in Ace science
interview is all about building
portfolio projects
and one of the things I love especially
in the zoom era because I started
writing this during covid but most of my
interviewing stuff was done before coven
right because I worked quite some years
before all this happened and that's
where I was doing my in-person hiring
and in-person interviewing
in the zoom era I can just drop a link
to my public dashboard or to my SQL
script or to my GitHub and I love that
because the interviewer might say like
uh um do you have any database
experience yeah and instead of you say
oh you have three years you say hey you
know what I actually analyzed the 2022
2021 Summer Olympics
in a tableau dashboard do you mind if I
just drop a link real quick I'd love to
show you it yeah and then suddenly you
share your screen you're showing it and
now instead of them asking you some
weird things like how do you how do you
visualize categorical data right instead
of them asking that you can just see
your handiwork and like have a real
conversation about why you display
things the way you did and just kind of
like Riff on that and there's a chance
that person might even like your
portfolio project because they like the
Olympics or they like whatever data set
you studied right so I think that's a
big big win that people don't realize
they can kind of steer the conversation
same way sometimes people in their last
job might not have done
the most relevant stuff but they have
something else on their resume where
it's far more relevant so the
interviewer might ask them oh tell me
about how you use SQL to do X and they
say oh yeah I did that in my last
internship but where I really use SQL
was actually two internships ago do you
mind if I talk about that because I got
to analyze two billion records with
bigquery and they're like oh of course
yeah let's talk about that I didn't I
didn't even scroll down that far to your
resume but sure let's talk about that if
that's more relevant to show a case in
your SQL scale so you can pick and
choose what you talk about
yeah that's that's empowering I think so
I hope listeners take that to our it's a
conversation you get depict right you
get to pick it's a two-way conversation
so
treat it like that yeah I love that
let's talk more about SQL because SQL is
a big part of the data interview process
you've created data lemur uh which is
designed to try to help make people feel
more comfortable with the SQL interview
process we talked about some of the
things you might be asked you know
conceptually or we talked about like the
difference between having and aware
clause in order by versus a group by you
know you get into rank versus dense rank
maybe what's a window function what does
it actually do those types of things but
how do you actually get good at SQL
interviews like or what's the secret to
cracking it
so first is do not underestimate
practice I mean that's the whole reason
we mail data leammer and have hundreds
of real SQL interview questions from
Bloomberg and CVS Pharmacy and Amazon
just like all kinds of companies not
just your fan companies just all kinds
of companies are all there so first up
is just practice right and that seems
really boring of an answer but
it's the right answer the second answer
is while you're practicing
practice a structured approach and this
is definitely needed for some of the
harder questions and on daily email all
the questions are ranked by difficulty
so you'll see some hard questions we
have to write 30 40 lines of SQL code in
a real interview in like five ten
minutes that's not an easy feat to do
that without making mistakes under
pressure on a data set you've never seen
before
so for those harder questions the trick
to Ace those is to follow a structured
process which is first make sure you
know what the questions even asking of
you
if that means you're confused ask the
interviewer what are we looking for what
are the end columns what does the output
need to look like yeah because you can't
even begin solving this if you don't
know what the N output needs to look
like what how many columns do they need
to be and what value should they have
second thing is explore the data
just do a simple select star do a simple
account just see what's in the data what
columns are there usually there might
not be some weird nulls or stuff but
sometimes companies like to mess with
you and put nulls or weird data or mess
up with the schema so just check that
for a few minutes or not even a few
minutes just like do a quick search or
ask the interviewer like hey can I
assume there's like no nulls and
everything's well formed or should I
explore that and
maybe they're saying I'll explore it or
it may be like no no it's just standard
like I just want to see you do the
basics next thing you do is try to break
down the big problem into smaller chunks
that seems obvious again all these
things seem obvious but again when I do
these mock interviews with people and
they start solving the question and then
they start saying and like freezing up
and like getting lost in their own
thought process because again 30 40
lines of SQL code it's easy to
get lost in the sauce or like forget
where you're at or like you know you
have a sub query with a sub query you
have a window function you have this
this you have to put up multiple pieces
it's really easy to mess up so I like to
say build smaller smaller Solutions
solve small sub problems and execute
code for these small sub problems you
don't want to write 30 or 40 lines and
then run it all at the end you want to
just make sure like you're working with
the smaller chunks and they're running
because it's way easier to figure out
and debug four or five lines of code or
like one window function or one simple
Group by then getting all the way to the
end and realizing where you messed up or
where you made a wrong assumption yeah
and that's basically the main process so
it's just practice and then for the
harder ones practice with a process
don't just jump in and start solving it
randomly and that's good that's
basically most of it love the process
you got to know what the end results is
you need to make sure that you
understand what your data shape and
what's in your data and if it's dirty or
not that makes sense breaking it down
into chunks always easier to to write
small chunks of code versus a big thing
I think that all makes sense so I really
like that answer my answer is practice
because like I personally and once again
I just want to emphasize that my roles
were not SQL heavy but so when I've
gotten to the SQL interview you know
tests like specifically when I was
looking for new jobs I was like man I
suck at these like this is unlike
anything I do with on my job you know
this is not a machine learning model
like this is not what I do at my job
right and so I was like I don't think
that these are representative of what I
actually do and I'm not good at them so
in order for me to get at them I have to
practice so I I almost think of it as
like a free throw in basketball right if
you get fouled in basketball you head to
the free throw line which basically is a
15-foot shot where it's like no one's
got to you and you get to just shoot it
right and it's like anyone who plays
basketball for the most part should be
good at free throws because it's just a
free shot you just buy yourself and you
can practice that all day long no issues
whatsoever and I kind of think of the
sequel interview almost as a free throw
where it's like it's gonna happen it's
guaranteed to happen and it's just a
matter of practicing and that's how we
get good at it yep exactly and again
most of the content on data lemur is
free and actually Avery no one knows
this so I'll announce it right now by
early next week
um there'll be a free sequel tutorial on
data lemur so if you struggle with SQL
in general or you just don't even know
SQL and you're trying to just level up
in SQL there's a free SQL tutorial
coming out on dataliemer.com SQL
tutorial if you care enough you could
even search it up right now and start
seeing it it's like not fully done but
it's 99 done already so you can go check
that out so that's another thing which
is like practice SQL interview questions
and if you just don't know SQL let's go
learn SQL like it's free you have no
excuse I love it that's that's great
we'll have that uh Link in the show
notes down below okay we could end the
podcast now but we're not because I want
to torture you and I want you to torture
me and I I want to do one behavioral
mock interview question so by the way we
didn't talk much about behavioral
interviews but that's a big part of the
data interview process and basically
what I want to do I'll play this other
game where I'm going to ask you one
behavioral interview question and then
you give your answer and then you ask me
one behavioral interview question Cool
you go and for the audience at home we
didn't plan this out so I don't know
what you're gonna ask me I don't have my
stories ready in a real interview I'd
come with some prep work but look let's
do it live we're live so let's do it so
it's gonna suck it's gonna be not the
best of all time but that's through life
so it's all right do you want to ask a
question first or you want me to ask the
question you can ask me first let's see
okay
I'm I'm gonna just keep it really basic
for you guaranteed this is how every
interview starts Nick thank you so much
for interviewing with data crew
jumpstart today we're excited to get to
know you better we'd love to learn more
about you tell us about yourself let's
back up one more second real quick what
role am I interviewing for oh yeah yeah
that's a good point let's say you're a
data analyst you applied for data
analyst we're all we'll say on LinkedIn
this is like maybe you had a short phone
screen with the recruiter you like met
the technical requirements and this is
your first interaction with the hiring
team
okay cool and I'm gonna
sort of use my past experience but not
all of it because then it might be
Overkill okay because I feel like I'd be
a pretty good data analyst at data
career jumpstart but yeah so let me let
me make up some details because or let
me pretend
let's pretend I'm it's back in 2016.
yeah and let's pretend it's a summer
internship okay it's 2015. it's a summer
internship so I'm in college I haven't
worked at Facebook yet I don't have all
this LinkedIn or anything it's back in
2015 and I'm looking for data analyst
internship which is very real life yep
okay so introduce yourself one more time
okay my name is Avery I'm the hiring
manager data career jumpstart we'd love
to learn more about you tell us about
yourself
hi everyone Thanks for so much for
taking the time
um my name is Nick I go to the
University of Virginia where I study
systems engineering which is kind of
like a mixture of computer science math
and business and that's actually how I
figured out that I might like data
analytics because honestly data
analytics is sort of a combination of
computer science math and business
in college I also ran a little bit of a
startup where I used data and I analyze
data around hip-hop artists taking data
from the spotify's API and that was
really fun and I actually realized from
that project not only do I like data
analytics I like working on my own
project or working with startups and
like just making really cool things with
data which kind of brings me to what I'm
looking for this summer I noticed you
know I reached out because I saw you on
LinkedIn you run this really cool
accelerator that's teaching people data
I love data as mentioned earlier and
then more importantly you're another
small business you're trying to figure
out things and you understand how
important data is to drive a business
and that's exactly the time a company I
want to work for so that's what brings
me here today to talk to you about this
data analyst internship
snaps for snaps for Nick that was good
that was really good I liked I liked how
you talked about like why you're
passionate like how it relates to the
company uh I I thought that was great
any comments on that
yeah I can just break it down I know
this was not perfect execution because
I'm making up some of these details it's
not 2015 anymore I'm not even gonna say
the date just so we can still listen to
this in 2029 as people think it just
happened perfect that sounds good
longevity you know yeah yeah this is
definitely happening in 2020. no no I
like I'm always just trying to break it
down to where did I come from
I told you about my major that's what I
would have talked about in school what
have I done
oh I built something and I analyzed
Spotify data
and then where am I going well I'm
trying to go and use data further and
work at a small business because I like
my own startup experience hint in Avery
runs a small business that uses data
trying to hire every data role what do
you know right so that's basically the
formula for one of these answers you
just talk about where you started what
you've accomplished recently
and then where you're headed which
almost always should look like oh yeah
I'm really interested in education right
I should have maybe I could have
mentioned oh I was a TA or something
which really got me interested in
education and helping people and that's
what you do here too
I wasn't a TA though so I couldn't say
that right now that that was great I
think you did good yeah
so
can I grill you now with a behave
reflection yeah that's the opportunity
I'm nervous you guys I'm nervous what is
okay now let me set you up their context
yep Avery you're interviewing to be a
product analyst or a product data
scientist on data lemur okay we're a
leader in education with thousands of
daily users learning using us to use SQL
I have all this data and I just don't
know where the product should go I want
to improve retention churn all these
things so I'm looking for a more product
minded data scientist or analyst to look
through my web analytics data my funnels
all that
so that brings me the interview so hi
every you know tell me about a time you
use data to actually you know
change the product roadmap or business
roadmap for any businesses you've worked
on in the past
oh that's really interesting that's a
great question so in terms of like
working with products my past experience
has been a biotech startup and a large
manufacturing company I would say
probably the most I've actually had to
deal with products was probably a
product I was creating at the
manufacturing company Exxon Mobil we are
basically working on and I have to
change some stuff because so actually
it's okay if it's for a business too
like anytime you basically use this to
make some actual impact on the types of
priorities the business did you know so
it's okay if it's on a product if it's a
business but just anytime you had
business impact driven through data
because ultimately the product is the
business at data lemur so I'm happy with
either way okay that makes sense I still
think I'm going to talk about this
example at Exxon Mobil and for all the
listeners I'm gonna have to change what
I'm actually talking about in an
interview I would feel okay talking
about it but let's talking about what I
did specifically about Exxon level tool
in front of thousands of people is not
NBA yeah
yeah I'll make up some details so
basically at Exxon I was in charge of of
working on a product obviously a small
product but a product that was going to
be used by an internal organization at
the company that would basically help
make better decisions on what crude oils
we bought around the world now I had to
look at the user data for that like see
how many times it was being used see how
many times it was being see how many
times it was like failing like there was
like an air or reported air and then
also looking at our customer service
logs to see to understand you know what
issues people were having as well as the
feature request locks because at the end
of day we had limited time at the
company right we only had so many hours
to work on this product and we had to
decide whether we were going to you know
work more on making it feature Rich and
adding new features that would delight
and surprise our customers versus
actually just going back and actually
trying to make it more sturdy that was a
big decision because obviously you only
have so much limited time and we ended
up deciding to support more of our
customers and work on making it more
dependable and stable although the
features were really interesting to us
and actually probably the more sexy
thing to management our data was
actually telling us that our users
couldn't even use the tool as is right
now and we needed to focus on creating a
complete MVP versus making that sounds
really really interesting what specific
metrics told you that oh man people
aren't using this or like you we should
prioritize our time
yeah I think one of the biggest things
that we were looking at is this tool
basically kept track of how many times a
user was running it and we were able to
make basically a cumulative line chart
of all uses over time and we saw that
when we released the tool people were
really interested in it but then it kind
of slowly had this decaying exponential
curve where people no longer really
using the tool and we thought it was a
great tool but we really saw that there
wasn't that much use of it and when we
broke it down by individual and by
individual a lot of the times we look at
our customer service data and we'd see
that tickets were created around the
same time that that individual user's
use went down and we realized man people
just need help with running this tool a
little bit more effectively and
stability
great yeah no that's a good answer
probably my only critique of it again
we're making this up as we go like he's
never heard these things maybe my only
critique would be a little bit more
about like the result we drove and so
then we improved it and actually found
double the usage or we improved it and
we used to have like maybe 200 users and
now we have 500 users or something like
that just drive drive that home like oh
damn okay great you doubled the usage or
you reduced the number of tickets or you
got two of X buy-in I don't know I don't
know how it would quantify it but like
no you're right so we in behavioral
questions we didn't really talk about
this you always want to use the star
method situation task action result and
I pretty much did the star method and I
didn't really hit the r hard enough
where I was like why does this actually
matter to the business like how did the
business make money how did the team get
stronger what are some tangible number
result that we could possibly talk about
so I'll add it now and that led to a
bajillion dollars in increase in amazing
amazing and you know what Avery I've
done this with a lot of people techies
we are all always all about the TNA oh
how do we solve it what was the task
what were the actions I took I built
this model that model and then we always
forget the result but I'm a businessman
I'm a business owner I'm a results
oriented person actually the r the thing
you forgot was the most important and
I'm not picking on you I'm saying this
happens all the time because we all
start geeking out about the actions we
took the things we built
and we forget about the business result
and that's honestly usually the thing
that nerve your cares about the most or
is impressed by the most I mean they
like the actions too but
if there was no business impact there
was no R then
how do I care about the story
so yeah this is great this was fun yeah
so all you listeners are are welcome for
forgetting the R so that way we could we
could yes we could harsh on it uh that
was great thank you Nick for the
interview and thank you so much for
leaving us with so many good ideas for
our interview we'll definitely have the
links to Ace the data science interview
as well as data Lemur in the description
down below anything else you you'd want
to add to the episode no check out data
lemurs free SQL tutorial check out the
questions go read the book Acer dating
science interview hit me up on LinkedIn
I have about 150 000 followers and I'm
talking all the time every day about the
data career stuff and portfolio projects
and interviews so or catch me on Twitter
too about 25 000 followers there too so
I'm around
excited to hear from y'all perfect and
I'll actually add this anyone that ends
up buying the book from the description
down below after you guys buy the book
send me a screenshot Avery
datacareerjumpstart.com of like just
like your receipt or actually a picture
of you having the book and and if you
have the book I'll do this too and if
you guys do that I'll send you guys
basically my book highlights of a data
science interview where I'll tell you
what pages and stuff I think is the best
to read so well can you can you send
that to me too I don't have a receipt
but
send me a picture of a copy with you in
the book yes okay I will do that okay
awesome thanks so much Nick for sure see
ya bye all right hopefully after that
episode you are feeling more confident
and have more of a direction in what you
need to do to prepare for this big
opportunity this data interview that I
promise you is coming your way as long
as you're following the ESPN method
these interviews will start to flow and
once you get into those interviews you
want to seize the moment and so take
action on what we talked about today you
know go check out Glassdoor go check out
data lemur go check out the ace data
science interview book we'll have links
in the description down below it's time
to take action you guys and prepare for
these interviews they are coming so when
that actually comes you'll be prepared
take the steps necessary I have a bonus
tip down in the description down below
as well so be sure to check out the show
notes and thanks for listening you guys
have a good day

Title: I Have Good News for Aspiring Data Analysts

Description: Join me in this week's episode as I share real success stories from participants in the Data Analytics Accelerator program. üßëüèΩ‚Äçüéì

These are REAL stories from REAL people like you, going through their journey. Some of their wins are big like data analyst job offers. Others are small and just include posting on LinkedIn or reaching out to a recruiter. 

Featuring resume and LinkedIn profile optimization tips that led to interviews and job offers, proving that small changes can make a big impact in your data career journey‚Äîtune in now!


Timestamps:
00:40 - üìä The Job Market is HARD.
02:58 - üíº Story 1: Interviews
05:33 - üë©‚Äçüíª Story 2: Quick Wins
07:25 - üíå Story 3: Cold Messaging 
8:36 - üí∞ Story 4: Senior Job Offer
11:40 - üöÄ Story 5: Small Wins
12:37 - üéì Story 6: Job Offer


Video Transcript:
in today's economy it can be pretty
depressing to be looking for a new job
honestly it can suck the life out of you
in today's episode I hope to breathe
some of that life back into you and get
you more motivated and excited to get
going on your data career journey and to
continue to keep the momentum going I'm
going to be sharing some real life
stories from people inside of my program
the data analytics accelerator about
good things that are happening to them
both big and small let's go ahead and
hop into this week's episode welcome to
the data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job here's your host
Avery Smith
so the job economy kind of is tough
right now and it can be really hard to
stay positive when you're facing
rejection after Rejection it can feel
really hopeless and I'm super sorry
that's not something I'd wish upon my
worst enemy of going through this whole
process so I feel for you and I'm there
with you it's hard in your own journey
to see any sort of success when you just
keep getting those rejection letters
over and over again but I want to tell
you that those successes are there both
big and small sometimes you just have to
tease them out like you have to like
kind of find them in the sand or like
the needle in the haystack but I want to
share you some real success stories from
my community inside of the data
analytics accelerator if you've never
heard of that it is my 10-week boot camp
to get you your day to job these are
normal people these people are on the
same Journey as you they're not you know
crazy I don't know successful people
they're just normal people like me and
you and they're going through the exact
same Journey that that you're going
through and they're able to find some
successes now some of these successes
are bigger than others okay some of them
might seem insignificant to you but I
want to tell you that if you can look
for the positive in this whole career
Journey you'll be able to find it all
right I of course might be sharing any
names from people in the program for
their privacy but I promise you I am
reading pretty much exactly what they've
said inside of the community I might
edit out some company names as to not
identify people but these are real
stories coming from real people I hope
it gives you more joy and happiness and
Hope on your journey and let's go ahead
and enjoy them alright so let's get with
the first story by the way these were
all posted inside of the community
inside of the data analytics accelerator
we have thankful Thursdays what we share
what we're thankful for we have success
Saturdays where we share our win from
the week no matter how big or how small
so these are Snippets all taken from
inside of the community if you want to
learn more about the data analytics
accelerator boot camp and Community go
to the show notes down below and you'll
be able to find a link there so let's
start with the first one here we go and
quote lots of success this past week the
number one thing that happened was I
applied some tips from the modules
inside of daa and that landed me three
Recruiters in my inbox those three
recruiters turned into three interviews
this past week and one offer that I'm
currently seeking negotiation on
basically what I did was reorder my
keywords under my profile picture I
added the term data analyst to my
current job position and I was more
active on LinkedIn which helped being
found by search via recruiters number
two I updated my resume to include links
to my portfolio and I've been told that
instead I'm being considered for more
roles instead of being rejected which is
awesome when I use Easy apply on
LinkedIn number three somehow I got lots
of requests for connection too I'm super
humbled by this and thankful because I
still remember thinking of strategies of
how I could get to 50 connections on
LinkedIn the data analytics accelerator
stepped my networking game up for sure
number four also have two interviews
with the city of blank for an analyst
role one this coming week and another
one the following week for a different
analyst role at Avery Smith your tips
are super paying out for me right now
number five the data analytics
accelerator Community has been super
inspiring with all the projects released
you are all awesome data analysts and
make me feel successful in finding
others with the same interest in data
keep up your great work everyone with
that said I will go finish working on my
SQL module now I know it's slow but it's
coming
that was our first story and I really
liked that obviously this was one of the
more successful ones where three
recruiters three interviews and one job
offer all in one week with two
interviews the next week as well and
really if you notice what this person
said what the change was had nothing to
do with how skilled they were it wasn't
like oh yeah I learned how to use the
window function better in SQL or yeah I
like learned how to do machine learning
in Python you'll pay closely attention
it was changes to resume and changes to
their LinkedIn profile absolutely
nothing to do with skills if you
remember if you're new to this channel
you'll know that I talk about or you
won't know that I talk about the SBN
method that is the method the formula
the equation for landing your First Data
job skills
s
portfolio and projects p network that if
you do all three of those well that is
when the jobs start to flow and in this
particular case the student didn't even
mention any of the S it was all about
the end it was all about the network in
this case specifically the LinkedIn and
the resume that really got the ball
rolling again so I love that story
hopefully you guys find it inspiring I'm
very inspired by the student okay let's
move to the Second Story this is from a
student who's a little bit newer in the
program they said I can't believe I
completed my first two weeks with the
data analytics accelerator I'm already
feeling quite confident in my data
Journey I've come a long way in just two
weeks number one I have published my
first project on LinkedIn the doordash
analytics with Excel project number two
I've become quite active on LinkedIn in
terms of posting and commenting my
LinkedIn analytics and Page views have
improved so much
number three I have completed the first
five modules in the course I just need
to finish my write-ups on my Tableau and
SQL projects and publish them this week
I will start building up my GitHub Pages
portfolio this week I joined the data
analytics accelerator just two weeks
later than the current cohort I'm very
satisfied about how I was able to catch
up with the course's trajectory
so first off
claps for you because doing five modules
in just two weeks is absolutely insane
but it shows how much you can cover when
you're really dedicated now this person
is looking for a job full time so a lot
of you guys won't be able to dedicate
that amount of time but still in just 14
days to have a project up to have
completed three other projects Tableau
SQL and an Excel project to get your
portfolio up and running like you guys
can do this you guys can make serious
progress in less time than you realize
does it take dedication yeah it does you
have to work hard you have to put in the
hours but and I need to be better at
this in my life I scroll so much you
guys I play Zelda on my Nintendo switch
anyone got the new Zelda game it's
really fun but I spend a lot of time
doing that I spend a lot of time on
Instagram I spend a lot of time on
YouTube I spend a lot of time on Tech
talk we can find cracks in our day to
study and I hope right now you're
currently plugging one of these gaps in
your day with this podcast and you're
learning about data careers you know
while you're commuting or while you're
working out or while you're doing the
laundry or something like that so good
for you if that's the case and you can
continue to do so and be like this
student and get a lot done in just 14
days moving on to Story number three I
had a few recruiters get back to me on
my cold message reach out this week
which felt really great I've noticed
that it does take a few days for people
to get back to me so I'm working on my
patients this is really cool this is a
win to have people respond to your cold
messages is a win is it the biggest win
of all time no but it is a win and we
need to celebrate everyone that we have
even the small ones cold messaging you
guys is really key again another part of
this program we're talking about SPN the
network cold messages is a huge part of
that Network aspect and if you're not
sending cold messages you are not
maximizing your chance to land jobs just
straight up that's how it is inside the
data analytics accelerator we have a
bunch of scripts and talk about who to
talk to and stuff like that but if
you're not inside the program yet we'd
love to have you go back to episode I
think
52 or something like that I interviewed
ASA Howard and we talked about how cold
messaging actually helped him land his
first data job he actually like cold
messaged like 12 people all within the
same company and basically by the point
it got to the interview they already
kind of knew him by his name so that was
a huge Advantage for Aces so go check
that episode out I really enjoyed it
okay Story number four here this is
coming from someone who's been in my
program a little bit longer and actually
already has a data job but that's one of
the cool things about the data analytics
accelerator is a lifetime membership so
I'm never kicking you out and you're
always welcome to come back to the
community to continue learning with us
to share your wins to help other people
all that good stuff so this says I
wanted to share an update I was
approached by a recruiter four weeks ago
keep in mind this person already has an
analytics job they had me apply for a
senior Finance analyst position here in
City the day after applying I got an
interview scheduled so let's just pause
here recruiter reaching out right
to the person not the person reaching
out to the recruiters that's the
relationship we want to have I went to
the in-person interview and then I had
the second interview in person interview
two days later and I was offered the
position that afternoon it was the
quickest and easiest interview to job
offer I have ever experienced I didn't
end up taking the position as there was
a few non-negotiables for the new
company and then my current company
actually offered me a promotion and
raise to stay after I let them know that
I had another offer from a different
company I've always been scared to ask
for a raise but after this situation I
felt more confident for the future I
also gained confidence that as I do
continue to look for other opportunities
out there something might present itself
as I put in the work everyone who is
currently job searching and applying for
positions don't give up hope there are
so many positions out there and as you
continue to upskill someone will
appreciate your skills and provide you a
position that you've been looking and
praying for
I love that post because it's a big win
did this person end up taking the job no
so is it a failure no like this is
awesome like what you can get promoted
at work by upskilling you can get
promoted at work by asking for it you
can get a raise if you ask for it you
know one of my biggest regrets when I
was at Exxon Mobil and you know maybe I
could have done this maybe I couldn't
have but I actually like left
axon obviously not super stoked about
being at Exxon right like if I was
stoked I would probably still be there
right so obviously I wasn't the happiest
camper but I didn't really let my boss
know that I was unhappy in a lot of
different ways some ways I did but some
ways I didn't and I think I could have
done more to probably push myself and
fight for my position inside the company
it's a whole other story for another day
but my point here guys is if you already
have a data job you have a chance to get
promoted or even if you don't have a
data job try to get it promoted with
where you're at right now at least make
a little bit more money and get more
respect that you deserve you know get
the paycheck that you actually deserve
so I love that from one of our students
sharing that you know win right there I
also love that the recruiter reach out
to them that's the power of having a
really good LinkedIn you can apply to
jobs but once jobs start applying to you
that is when the money comes you guys
those are great opportunities don't
chase jobs let jobs chase you you do
that by having a really strong Network
means you have a good profile on
LinkedIn a good resume and good
connections all stuff we cover inside of
that analytics accelerator program
and then here's the next story
this is a small success but like I said
we share all sorts of successes big and
small and we want to celebrate no matter
the size
so this is from one of my students and
said My Success a week ago I went on a
limb and posted an update on LinkedIn
that's the success right there posting
on LinkedIn is very difficult when
you're getting started so we want to
congratulate this person and say way to
go the next day a former customer
messaged me to catch up and we had a
discussion about potential data job
opportunity I didn't walk away from the
position or that discussion very
optimistic but it was a success
considering for me networking doesn't
come naturally
that's key you guys to just get
networking when it's not natural to you
that's a big opportunity so I want to
shout out this student and say
congratulations I think that is totally
awesome that you did it and I think all
of us listening should reach out more
put ourselves out there be more
vulnerable put ourselves on a limb and
we have more of those conversations more
good opportunities will come by all
right next story hey everyone I
hesitated to post this before now
because I guess I'm superstitious but
since I start my new job on Monday I
wanted to let you all know I have been
hired as a data analyst for this blank
company specifically in this certain
Department the hiring manager the hiring
process was long and I wanted to share
my experience I first submitted my
application in early may I was not
contacted for a phone interview until
late May so long period there
interviewed with two members of the
selection community and was not
contacted for the next round until
mid-june so three weeks later the
on-site interview was a two hour process
meeting with three different people
individual visually and then the
committee of six people I was finally
offered the job on June 30th the job was
all on site but was able to negotiate
one day remote a week by the way that is
now bumped up to two days a week
remotely
I honestly was looking for a hybrid role
since I perform better with an in-person
interaction anyways they said that they
would be open to looking an additional
remote day after a year so that after a
year was after a month I live in a rural
area so it's a little bit of a drive to
the office but I was able to negotiate
additional pay to compensate for gas and
for car maintenance I honestly didn't
think I got the position since it was
taking so long I had almost accepted
another offer when I got the offer call
I want to note that they specifically
said I got the job because of my
background in the field so for all of
you people with different diverse
backgrounds out there have faith and
uncover those jobs in your domain I love
this obviously it is someone in the
program who lended a job so it's near
near my heart because I love my students
I want the best for them and I get
really excited when they land awesome
jobs like this by the way this person
also got an increased salary of let's
see like 25 no higher like 40 or
something like that just doing some math
in my head yeah close to 45 percent
increase recent salary and obviously now
our remotes twice a week but I love this
because the job process is long it is
long you guys and you will apply and you
won't hear back and then you'll hear
back and you'll do an interview and then
you won't hear back and then you'll get
another interview and then oh my gosh
it's like this whole process from early
May
through all of May through all of June
and through like half of July just to
get this one job so it is a long process
even though she was the right pick the
whole time in this process so don't give
up you guys you guys might surprise
yourselves what happened when I
originally applied to work at Exxon
Mobil it's a very rigorous you know
process to get hired at Exxon Mobil
especially out of college which is what
I was doing is like stages and stages of
interviews and every time I was so
nervous to hear back if I got to the
next stage if I got to the next stage if
I got to the next stage and I basically
like added like seven stages I got past
the sixth and then my resume sat there
for a long time I did some interviews
they said I wasn't a fit I even got a
rejection letter and said sorry we're
not a fit but we'll save your resume you
know at the bottom where it's like sorry
you want to fit for this role but we'll
save your resume in case anything pops
up and you're like bull crap You're
Gonna Save my resume like that means you
just didn't want me right and I actually
accepted a different job offer at the
time and that was in like December of
that year and then in late March so
three months later I got a phone call
hey this is Exxon Mobil you want to
interview for this position
sure yeah I want to interview and I
ended up getting that position actually
pretty easily they basically did like a
phone screening and then offered me at
the end of the phone call it was kind of
crazy to be honest but I was just a
match for the role they were looking to
fill so you never know when you get
those rejection letters if it might lead
to anything probably 99 times out of 100
it's not but every once in a while it
does so I don't want you guys to give up
with these rejections if it's taking a
long time have faith have hope this
student's experience might be your
experience down the road now I hope you
enjoyed these stories I hope they were
enlightening they gave you hope and they
make you more excited to apply to more
jobs and continue your data career
forward they all came from inside of my
program the data analytics accelerator
so if you guys want to learn more about
that you guys can click the link in the
show notes down below to learn more we
have an awesome program you guys I'm in
the community every single day
commenting sharing dming you know we go
live at least for two hours a week right
now I'm really in there trying to help
people land jobs as much as I possibly
can I think you you guys would really
enjoy it once again click the link in
the show notes down below and I hope
these stories brightened your day and
made you more excited to work hard this
week on finding a job wishing you guys
all the best talk to you later bye

Title: What Is People Analytics? w/ Serena Huang

Description: Want to know what it takes to land your dream data analytics job?

Dr Serena Huang, an ex PapPal Analytics Executive, spills the beans and shares invaluable tips on standing out in the hiring process. ü´ò

She also discusses what People Analytics is & how to learn more. 

Whether you're a new grad or a seasoned professional looking to make a career transition, this episode has got you covered!

Tune in now and unlock the possibilities. üéß

Connect with Dr Serena Huang:

ü§ù Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/serenahhuangphd/
üåê Website: https://www.datawithserena.com/
‚èØÔ∏è Linkedin People Analytics Course I: https://www.linkedin.com/learning/the-data-science-of-using-people-analytics/
‚èØÔ∏è Linkedin People Analytics Course II: https://www.linkedin.com/learning/building-a-data-driven-skills-first-workforce-strategy/the-business-case-of-skills-first-strategy


Timestamps:
04:58 - üöÄ What is People Analytics 
17:09 - üåü Keys to getting hired in data
25:06 - üìä What makes a good data team 


Video Transcript:
one of the coolest Parts about data
analytics is how it applies to every
domain seriously no matter what industry
you're in data analytics can help that
industry and specifically on my podcast
today we have Serena Huang who I'm
really excited to talk to about people
analytics which is basically how do we
use data analytics with people
specifically in the workplace so it's
kind of like human resources HR data and
combining that with human elements in
the workplace what type of analytics can
we find what type of insights can we
find what type of data is available and
also Serena is an analytics executive so
we talk about what makes a good entry
level higher what makes a good data team
and what you can do on your data journey
to stand out more in the job process
that sounds good let's go ahead and hop
into the episode welcome to the data
career podcast the podcast that helps
aspiring data professionals land their
next data job here's your host Avery
Smith
all right welcome back to the data
career podcast I'm so excited for my
guest today it is Dr Serena Huang she's
a people analytics expert working with
companies like PayPal code craft Heinz
and she's also a LinkedIn learning
instructor and Linkedin top voice in
2023 and also a new founder so Serena
welcome to the podcast we're excited to
have you
thank you so much excited to be here
today as well yeah so a little bit about
your journey you have all these really
neat uh experiences that you've done in
your career you've worked for some
pretty big companies done some pretty
cool things you have a PhD as well which
is really impressive but you
specifically kind of work in a field
that we hear a little bit about in data
analytics but not too much and that is
people analytics so I was hoping you
could tell us a little bit about what
people analytics is people ask me this
question all the time and I wish I have
like some official standard answer
um but the feel has continued to evolve
so every year or so I actually update my
definition based on what I have learned
every time I talk to a CEO and I ask
them a question of what is your most
important asset guess what they say it's
their people okay it's not the building
that's sitting empty these days it's not
a Machinery they own it's their people
so if people is the most most important
asset the board of directors are very
interested and investors as well in the
return on this asset right so Roa is
probably a metric that you have heard in
other parts of your life and people
analytics helps you really maximize the
return on this most important asset to a
company
and that if that sounds too difficult
and too over the top think about it in
easier terms like using data analytics
to improve everything when it comes to
talent and an organization from hiring
to retention to Promotions to diversity
and inclusion those are all areas where
people analytics cover so it's broad but
it's also very Niche at the same time
okay so people analytics is basically
using data to protect a company's number
one asset which is their people the
different subgroups might be recruiting
and hiring you know promotion retention
keeping people at the job and diversity
is that kind of a fair summary
yes definitely okay now that's really
interesting and I totally understand
that having you know accompanies people
be the number one asset and you
definitely want to make data-driven
decisions when it comes to all of your
assets including the people can you tell
us a little bit more like I'm just
imagining you know when I worked for
Exxon Mobil you know part of their
hiring team or recruiting team like what
goes into like what type of data sets do
people have for like hiring data sets or
like recruiting data sets yeah so if you
think about yourself when you have gone
through an application process right
what did you submit probably your resume
at some point hopefully no one asked for
a couple others anymore but some do and
then at some point there might be some
background checks on your you know
education and your previous jobs a lot
of that get entered into the company
system and then sometimes people have
really structured interviews where
people on the panel actually take notes
on you those data could be stored
somewhere as well including technical
assessments and things like that not
every company does that of course but
sometimes they do and it could be in the
system that really started with the
first moment you apply hit that apply
button and start uploading documents and
then once you are hired right there's
also you know now we know how long it
took you to get here right what's the
interview date you know and what was
your higher day uh what was the day of
your application something that a lot of
recruiting teams will measure is
something called time to hire right uh
LinkedIn actually just published their
time to hire a day that was very
interesting you can see how long it
takes by discipline it takes to get a
job so from the moment you start the job
search to the moment that you are hired
um obviously that varies so some some
feels like Consulting have one of the
longer time to hire why is that well
Consulting is known for you know really
strict and rigorous process when it
comes to interviews there are case
studies there are rounds and rounds of
interviews to make sure the Consultants
are top-notch and I can say that's true
from my experience I was a consultant at
one point myself and and in other fields
it might be faster so time to hire could
be one of the metrics that you ended up
having but along the way there's a lot
of data collected on each individual
candidate to get there wow okay that's
really fascinating so you know your
resume the questions you answered the
interview process you went through
that's some of the data that might be
you know used in terms of hiring and
recruiting analytics so that's highly
unstructured data that sounds like to me
like that's something that you know we
don't necessarily talk a whole lot in
the data Community the difference
between structure and unstructured data
you can basically think of structured
data as like it fits in a rectangle like
it has rows and it has columns but it
really sounds like a lot of at least the
recruiting and hiring data is pretty
unstructured starting with like a resume
or text answer to questions so that does
that increase the difficulty of doing
these Analytics
it does and this is one of the most
common complaints we hear a lot from
candidates right you've asked for my
resume and then the next step I have to
enter my job history by hand again why
is that well this is exactly the
structure a non-structured data problem
because the resume is unstructured a lot
of the systems for applicants do not
have those Smart Text analytics built in
to extract everything from your resume
and turn it into you know year one to
year five you were at this job at this
company you would think it was able to
do that for the most part but it's so
difficult that's why a lot of systems
will actually ask you to tell them from
you know from your your graduation to
today fill out the job history that is
very painful this is not to say all
hiring systems work that way but many of
them still do unfortunately or sometimes
it tries and it makes mistakes it could
make an attempt to parse out your resume
into that more structured data and ask
you to verify and because the resumes
don't come and stay in their formats
right think about the font that you use
and this is why it's important to try to
use standard fonts if you can when you
are applying don't make it more
difficult right use the same Dash if
you're going to use the dash don't use
double here and then single there
um so basic things so that it can be
understood by systems in the easy way
and yeah that's kind of what goes on
behind the scenes a little bit so next
time you're very frustrated with the
hiring system know that it's because of
a data challenge of structure you know
versus unstructured data that is so much
more difficult to deal with yeah that
that makes sense that is difficult okay
and then like in terms of I'm just
thinking of like retention keeping
people on the job where does that data
even come from
yeah so it's actually very simple so we
know the moment you enter a company you
have a higher date right and then by the
time you leave the company you have some
sort of termination date whether that's
you leaving or the company asking you to
leave or maybe there's a restructuring
that happened and a particular business
unit closed down so there's kind of
basically your start and end day of your
employment with the company that's your
tenure within that company then you look
at across you know maybe different
groups what percentage of people stay
beyond x number of years that's often of
Interest one metric I like to look at
and encourage companies to look at that
tells you a lot about your onboarding
process your hiring process something
called new hire retention so you can
look at what percentage of your new
hires within the first year are still
there
if the majority of your new hires are
gone by year one that's probably a bad
sign of something going pretty raw
either in the recruiting process where
they will promise something then show up
they get something different or your
onboarding was so poor that by week
three they haven't received their laptop
they're just sitting around right so I
give those somewhere those extreme
examples but actually not too extreme
because I have seen them happen to
candidates and those create really poor
experiences and make people want to
leave really fast so look at your new
hire retention that could be a great
area to start if you want to make sure
you can retain people and of course
that's not just one of them you can also
look at retention by different
demographics right we hear a lot about
gen Z and younger Millennials jumping
from one job to another and not staying
longer that might be true externally you
don't know if that's true for your
organization until you take a look at
your data perhaps your gen Z are super
happy you have no idea until you look so
one of the beauty about people analytics
is that there's now a lot of external
research available people are starting
to share a little bit more but you
always have to stay curious and validate
with your own data to see what your
employees are saying and what they need
versus just taking some industry
Benchmark and assume that is the case
for your organization yeah that makes a
lot of sense that's actually now that
you mentioned it so I run a data
bootcamp called the data analytics
accelerator where we try to do realistic
projects based in different Industries
and we actually it's our R module our R
and statistics module we actually use
the IBM attrition data set that's kind
of famous in the people analytics World
very familiar yeah and I think that's
actually the biggest use case of that
project is we're trying to figure out if
there was like a discretion between ages
like did the company I can't remember if
the people quit or if they were fired
but the people who exited the company on
average were they younger than the
people who stayed at the company and
trying to compare you know what were
some of the factors to to people leaving
this company so that's people analytics
basically
yeah that's definitely a huge part
including the when you get to more
mature analytics you know maturity curve
and you get to Predictive Analytics
right where you are now not only saying
how many people I've Loved but also
predicting who is going to leave you
know if I give you the option and you're
the CEO of a company and say I can tell
you how many people left and why versus
I can tell you who is going to leave and
why which would you rather know yeah who
and why
right so because I can't do anything
about the past yes you can help inform
and that's all great but most
importantly I want to know for the
people I have today who is at risk and
and intervene
um if it's someone I definitely want to
keep or if it's you know a group of
people who have important knowledge of
my product and and I can't lose them
because my business will fail then those
are really useful information to have
versus just looking in the rear view
mirror and and saying oh a bunch of
people left and why yeah that doesn't
seem very useful it's like oh we lost
all our best people it's like oh crap we
want to be able to try to get ahead of
that and so really in people analytics
you know we look at the four different
types of analytics you know descriptive
you know who left diagnostic like why
they left like predictive being able to
predict you know who might leave or how
many will leave in the future but then
probably that prescriptive of like how
do we you know
using the data we know how do we keep
our best talent how do we make our
company the best asset it is so it's
pretty fascinating all these different
types and facets of people analytics now
an interesting title I've heard of
recently is a compensation analyst and
to my understanding they're basically
analyzing data off of salaries like how
much people actually get paid would you
say that also falls underneath people
Analytics oh good question it depends so
a lot of organizations have grew people
analytics with the compensation or
sometimes they're called total rewards
team where rewards include compensation
and benefits and they could be grouped
together as kind of a single Center of
Excellence called it like the numbers
people in HR if you will so people would
touch numbers sometimes they sit
somewhere else so it depends on the
structure it may or may not be part of
people analytics I would say that
compensation is a data that people
analytics team definitely use but that
doesn't mean all compensation
professionals should be in people
analytics because the skill sets are
very different ultimately the
compensation analysts are there to make
sure people are paid correctly right
correctly meaning you know a line was
Market meaning a line was what the
company wants to pay them not every
company has the same pay philosophy
right and so whatever that philosophy
philosophy is along with internal equity
and alignment with external Market
that's how they do their job and you
know I think there's a lot of overlap in
terms of skill sets so I've seen people
move in and out from compensation into
people analytics and vice versa so it's
interesting well it's not the same skill
set and within compensation purely there
isn't a ton of you know super I would
say Advanced analytics like no one
to my knowledge at least as like you
know by themselves running machine
learning model and compensation but you
know is there room for that at least you
know basic regression models yes
absolutely and oftentimes what they
actually do is they will hire uh
external companies to do some sort of
audits and that doesn't mean the
compensation team has no internal
expertise oftentimes in another
situation they just want someone
unbiased someone external to provide
that external View and that's why so
I've definitely seeing a lot of
compensation Airlines come my way as
candidates and say Hey I want to do
something much more interesting beyond
what I do upload all my analytic skills
and I want to get into your organization
instead okay interesting let's talk a
little bit more about your organization
because when you were an analytics
executive at PayPal you actually
quadrupled the size of your team in a
very short period of time and a lot of
our listeners you know a lot of people I
speak to are trying to land their first
data job so I wanted to ask you what do
you feel like makes a good entry-level
data candidate yeah so I think there are
kind of two main skill sets
um right that we look at in the
interview process your technical skills
of course and then your what I call
business skills I don't like the term
soft skills so I don't use them I call
them business skills so the technical
skills really depends on the role really
at minimum but you gotta know things
like SQL pretty well if you're going to
be on my team so you know I'll preface
this Say by saying that not every people
on analytics team uses the same tool set
a lot of times it depends on you know
the existing team what their it team
will support right at the company
sometimes you don't get to make the call
between power bi and Tableau because you
simply already have enterprise-wide
license to one so in in other languages
it's a little bit more flexible but
generally it's often up to the leader of
the team to decide right what they want
to use what they're comfortable was and
so SQL is one of the languages that I
always interview for and then if you
have more advanced and you know data
science for example then it's probably
python potentially are and then you know
so technical skills very important and
then you know when it comes to business
skills something I always look for is
I'm calling this intellectual curiosity
so intellectual curiosity and actually
intellectual humility intellectual
curiosity means you are constantly you
are a curious person and not just
curious in general but you're curious
about data analytics you are interested
in continuing to grow your skill set
whether it's technical or business so
one of the questions I will ask
candidates and I will continue to ask
people on the team is what's something
new you have learned this past week
if someone in data analytics tells me
that they haven't learned anything new
in the past week the speed that we're
evolving is so fast that means the
person is likely not curious and not for
my team that doesn't mean they are not a
good fit for somewhere else but
Innovation was always really important
to me as a leader when I was leading
teams and so I want people who are
naturally curious and they are not
sitting there waiting for me to tell
them to go innovate waiting for me to
tell them to learn something new right
waiting for their skill set to be
outdated and then learn something so
that's curiosity and then the curiosity
is also really important when it comes
to people analytics because data is
really messy the data quality I have
seen just recruiting along is is a mess
because there's a lot of candidates
where a job and sometimes things get
entering correctly we talked about
unstructured data being difficult so all
of us mean by the time it gets to the
data lake or whatever you know storage
you have for your data
um it could be really messy and requires
some cleanup so anyways curiosity means
you are asking the tough questions right
when you see something that doesn't seem
right right someone who might be paid
um you know two billion dollars while
everyone else in the same job is getting
paid 20 000 you know there might be a
decimal point that's gone wrong maybe
it's a currency conversion issue but you
need to be curious enough to ask those
questions before you start to generate
some sort of chart that incorporates the
two billion dollar salary in there right
um so that's one example I've been
curious intellectual humility is also
really important that means you need to
know and be willing to accept that you
are wrong sometimes and that you have
something to learn doesn't matter how
educated where you went to school how
many years of experience you have and
and how high your IQ is whatever the
situation is at some point we are all
making some sort of mistakes and that we
need to learn from so having the
intellectual humility helps me know that
this person is willing to learn from
others on the team and willing to learn
from you know the business one mistake I
often see people who come from very
impressive backgrounds uh whether it's
you know big companies or Ivy Leagues
and this is not at all a knock on them
is that sometimes they lose the humility
because it was a humility and they will
say this is how we have done it at
company X enter impressive name right
this is what I have learned in graduate
school enter impressive school name and
guess what it may not work here and
that's all the stakeholder needs to say
to you or it doesn't work here even
worse right and so I never want my team
members to be on the receiving end of
it's not going to work here or you know
some form of you don't know what you're
talking about and you're simply giving
me something that you think will work
from your past experience without
getting your assumptions so those two
things are really important and I bring
those up on top of your you know typical
ability to communicate right ability to
communicate to Technical and a
non-techful audience I think those are
really basic communication strong
communication skills stakeholder
management building relationship with
people those are important business
skills but for me I think the like the
secret sauce because I would get upwards
of you know more than a thousand
applicants per job I needed to get to
really quickly who are going to be the
top candidates and that some of the
differentiators like I said beyond the
base sick technical skills the key
business skills are things like
curiosity and humility okay awesome I
think those are some really good points
I I do agree that like I mean one thing
you have to think about with people
analytics in general is due to its
unstructured nature of the data that
often does make the analysis harder
which usually means you have to have
more skills and usually a little bit
more difficult tools like for example
you know I mostly teach people how to
become data analysts I tell them all you
have to know is Excel SQL and then we
choose to learn Tableau just because
it's a little bit more easily available
than power bi but if you're looking at
resume data you're gonna have a hard
time doing any analysis of resume data
with Excel or just with sequence like
you need some sort of tool like python
or R to actually get it into a little
bit more of a structured place now maybe
someone else on the team has done that
but um that is a really good point when
you're working with more on structured
data you typically need a more of a
loading heavy tool like python to do
some of the heavy lifting yeah for you
definitely and I think it depends on the
team that you're on too right where you
know if on a larger team where people
have more specialized roles and that's
the trade-off between joining a larger
team versus a smaller team right on the
larger team you might dedicate a data
scientist who can do all the text
analytics for the whole team and maybe
that's part of their job maybe you have
one dedicated person just doing text
analytics and they're an expert in that
field that means everyone else can just
say well I need X Y and Z and the super
data scientist who's great at texting
analytics will help us that's one
possibility so I don't think we can all
become experts in everything that's not
realistic but in on a smaller team you
might have to play a generalist role uh
role where you are doing Excel power bi
and potentially a little bit of python
and SQL as well so it just really
depends on the structure and the scope
of of the role yeah and with that I
wanted to talk to you since you did grow
this team you know quadruple this team
size and you have worked as an executive
I want to talk about what you think
makes a good data team I guess first
starting with what you think constitutes
a data team like what are the different
roles potentially in a team yeah sure so
every team of course is is different but
in general from the teams that I've LED
at least there's always a set of um
rules I'll call them Consultants there
are customer facing you know analysts
who are great with data analytics but
most importantly they are there to
translate a business problem into
something data analytics can solve
that's their job so think about in a
restaurant setting there are the servers
if you will so they go to the customer
they ask what you want and then they go
back to the kitchen and they bring out
the dish and then we also have on the
more technical sides anywhere from data
Engineers who will turn unusable raw
data into beautiful tables for the rest
of the team
um to then kind of data analysts that
could be either people with bi skills
right they do visualization they do
reporting to maybe someone who can do a
little bit more than that right basic
analytics not machine learning type some
basic modeling all the way to data
scientists who you know like are not
always that good with SQL but they are
experts in Python they know how to build
models that perform well so those are
kind of the combination but over time
I've started to need additional rules to
make sure the my Center of Excellence if
you will is running smoothly so over
time I added things like a storytelling
and visualization experts right so data
storytelling is all the rage and there's
bazillion books and YouTube videos on on
this topic but very few people actually
do it super well so it's a skill set
that we can always continue to improve
and in people analytics too how do you
tell a story about recruiting data that
will make the leadership team want to
take action as opposed to just saying eh
okay that's kind of interesting and move
on right that's sudden the worst
nightmare of you doing all the work and
no one does anything and I think the
power that the the key to unlock that is
good data storytelling so that means you
know not only translating the the
results into something that can be
understood and actionable but also good
graphics along the way and presentation
and so on the other role I also added
that is nothing a lot is a product
manager
so I wanted you know because we were you
know a smaller team at the beginning we
wanted to be all about scale we wanted
things to be scalable and instead of
thinking of dashboards as just
dashboards they are products and we also
built some internal apps and things like
that so these are all products of the
people analytics team and eventually we
need a product manager to create a
roadmap and make sure they're talking to
the right stakeholders and so on so it's
definitely mature over time but those
are I think the key rules that that you
can definitely see from consultant to
data Engineers data analysts bi
visualization Specialists data
scientists all the way to you know
product manager visualization experts so
yeah yeah I think something that you
said that really resonated with me and
thanks for that breakdown was you know
you created these new roles you
mentioned there's like the consultant
the analyst the scientist the engineer
right but you've worked at a lot of
different companies for you know a lot
of different years and I wanted to get
your thoughts on one thing I've noticed
in the data field is that titles
sometimes don't really mean anything
especially from company to company and
year after year so I wanted to hear your
thoughts on like what different data
roles and titles have existed and you
know how you've seen them change year
after year
yeah I think there are some data
analytics roles that have had the same
title for decades like that role has
existed in one shape or form from even
before Excel existed probably I don't
know what that year is but all the way
to you know data scientists right
there's kind of different versions of
data scientists now
um that's more focused
um to now we're seeing a lot of their
focused AI specific roles right like AI
um you know ethical responsible AI
Specialists for example that probably
doesn't exist 20 years ago and we've
seen them evolve over time so my gosh my
advice for if you are looking for a job
and you've had some non-standard I will
call it job titles is to standardize
them right standardize them so that it
will make sense to every single company
that you're talking to on your LinkedIn
profile and on your resume both so that
it doesn't come off as like oh what is a
data ninja right like that sounds cool
but I I kid you not and so you know make
sure it's translatable right make sure
it's translatable to rather crowd and
then if you are looking for people to
hire and you're creating job
descriptions you're like should I make
it really interesting so you will stand
out or should I make it very general uh
so people can understand I think there's
a fine line right like for me when I was
hiring uh you know data storytelling I
meant for it to be cool and attractive
right I meant for that to grab attention
of um you know this is a director level
role I know that's going to grab a lot
of applicants already but on top of that
it is like newly created never been done
before but then you know but then you
know I'm very specific in the skill sets
and like you need to know how to do x y
and z
um so it's a fine line depends on what
you're doing but as a Candida that you
definitely want to make sure you
standardize and then someone who is
posting jobs that consider the
trade-offs of who you are attracting
that ultimately will give you who you
need I think that's really good advice
you know when I worked at ExxonMobil one
of my positions was an optimization
engineer which is really not a title you
hear much of and I was making you know
machine learning models so can I just
call myself a data scientist when I
worked for a biotech company my role was
a junior chemo nutrition and it's like
you don't hear that role very often so
it's like can I just say that's like a
data analyst role or something like this
sure and I think so like inside of the
data world I think that's true that
sometimes these titles get a little bit
wonky and we need to simplify them on
our resume simplify them on our LinkedIn
but even in whatever role you're in
right now sometimes simplifying the name
of your official bill can be really
beneficial I I have a student inside of
the boot camp right now who I don't
remember his official title but he's
basically it was like on his LinkedIn
and on his resume when I went and did
the one-on-one resume review and the
one-on-one LinkedIn review it was like
painter delivery Specialist or something
like that okay and I was like okay I
don't think you want to stay in the
painting industry necessarily and like I
don't really know what this role does so
like can we just simplify this to like
operations Specialist or like something
that like makes a little bit more
General people are going to recognize
what it is versus like I don't know what
the heck this specific job actually does
so I think people can really take that
to heart that definitely and then if I
could add one more this is on the Other
Extreme right of people wanting to sound
better or maybe they sometimes have are
working in a job that they think deserve
a higher title than they have being
given at the company and they decided
that since no one is checking up on my
LinkedIn profile I'm just going to to
call myself something else I would say
be very careful with that because the
data analytics world is not that big and
I've definitely had those you would
think reference checks and whatnot are
not happening anymore but I've
definitely received text DM phone calls
emails from people asking like this
seems like a higher level than the
person's experience you know really
shows is that we just wanted to check
maybe you guys call it different things
at your company so I've definitely
answered those calls and and make sure
that you don't make that mistake of
getting to the final stage working so
hard and then having something that is
sounding like you are lying on your
profile on LinkedIn that calls you the
job so yeah it's a small world smaller
than you would think I think one time I
had interview for a role and I was about
to be like my first bosses uh one over
one so you just never know it's a very
small do you think that's more true in
both more senior roles and larger
companies would you say that's true
yes and no yes because the one it might
be hard to check right but like
sometimes you suddenly see you know
maybe there are two people with very
similar roles like okay the company
should only have one CFO yeah there
seems to be two that doesn't make sense
so sometimes it can be super obvious
like that where you want to be careful
why other times it might be hard to
check so in a large company you might
think no one is checking up on you but
you know it happens in a smaller company
sometimes because the growth is so fast
that you really take on additional
responsibilities I think you know if I
could coach a mentor people again who
had that problem I always say look this
is a time for you to reflect on whether
or not you're in the right role if
you're doing that before you go and
update you know either out of anger
resent or whatever insert emotion
um on LinkedIn
talk to your boss right think about
whether or not you should be promoted
instead or you should look for another
role because the company is not valuing
you
um and ask yourself those top questions
because you know updating that LinkedIn
might make you feel good for a little
bit but you get no pay increases you get
no recognition and and ultimately it
might cost you something at the end
because it's not going to match your
company record think about whether or
not that's actually a sign for you to
speak to your boss about promotion or
look somewhere else okay awesome well
Serena this has been really good any
other advice you'd give to specifically
entry-level data professionals people
trying to Pivot their careers into the
data field
yeah I gosh experiment as much as you
can I have learned so much from doing
things that I ended up really disliking
is equally informative as you know
landing something that I really enjoy so
make sure when you are in your 20s use
the time to experiment by the time you
get to me in my 30s it's a little bit
harder it's not hard I would say it's
more costly right like it's more costly
to have to start over uh at the bottom
of another organization like it's the
salary differential is higher and then
definitely find as many mentors along
the way as you can who I will you know
who are a few years ahead of you and can
tell you how the world really works and
and I think the discipline maybe the
third is if you can try different
Industries and disciplines of data
analytics it's fascinating I did a short
project in supply chain it was like
logistic type work and I realized I
could do the work but it was not very
interesting for me so you know like like
I said this is about Gathering data on
yourself as well and figuring out what
you truly enjoy and what makes you come
alive right like answer simple questions
is there a particular project that
really brings you a smile and you want
to do more of what does that look like
so that you can have a long and
fulfilling career in data analytics
awesome Serena thank you so much for
being on the podcast we really
appreciate it of course thanks so much
for having me you're welcome to follow
me on LinkedIn or check out my website
it's data with serena.com hopefully you
leave this episode feeling a lot more
confident about people analytics and
maybe you can become a people data
analyst or an HR data analyst or
something else if you want help on your
journey in fact if you want a project
about people analytics and HR data plus
eight other projects to put on a
beautiful portfolio I highly recommend
you check out my program the data
analytics accelerator if you enjoyed
this podcast you're likely to enjoy the
boot camp as well I'll have some links
in the description down below for you
guys to check it out and as always good
luck on your daily journey and I'm here
to help have a good one everyone

Title: Get Hired as a Data Analyst w/ Hiring Manager Andrew Madson

Description: In this episode, Andrew Madson, an experienced data analytics professional & hiring manager, shares valuable insights and tips on transitioning into the field of data analytics. üí†

We discussed what ACTUALLY gets you hired, how to make good data projects, & how to pivot into the data field. 

Whether you're just starting your data career journey or looking to make a pivot, this episode is a must-listen! üéß

ü§ù Connect with Andrew Madson: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-madson/


Timestamps:
03:46 - üìà The Surprising Skill You Need
13:20 - üéôÔ∏è Make Your Data Projects Clear 
20:28 - üîç Data Skills You Should Know
29:11 - üåê Networking: Your Gateway to Career Success!


Video Transcript:
are you pivoting into data analytics
from some sort of other field if so
today's episode is for you we talked to
Andrew Madsen about his career Journey
from business where he was already
established he was already actually
pretty high up in his industry but he
wanted to Pivot in the data analytics
how did he do so well it involved a
couple different things at one point he
was even working two jobs at once he was
working in eight hour day in the
mornings and then an eight hour day in
the evenings one as a business
professional one as a data analyst he
got a master's degree and also he talks
about how you can use your network and
projects to land your First Data job
it's a really good episode so let's go
ahead and hop into it welcome to the
data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job here's your host
Avery Smith
okay you guys my guest today is Andrew
Madsen who is a man of many hats he is a
content creator on LinkedIn giving lots
of helpful hints and tips and tricks in
his career that you can apply in your
data analyst Journey as well he has a
quite a large experience section with
lots of things going on he works for
Western Governors University as a
faculty there he's worked in the past
there as a lead data analyst as well
he's a professor at a bunch of different
colleges and he also works for LPL
Financial as a product manager in the
compliance and analytics and monitoring
space so Andrew welcome to the podcast
we're so happy to have you thanks Avery
I'm happy to be here
okay awesome so you have all these
different experiences that you've done
in the data world you didn't study data
analytics though right you kind of eased
into Data as your career progressed
that's right my undergrad definitely was
not in data I eventually did get a
masters in data analytics but I was
already transitioning into the industry
before I finish that master's degree
okay awesome so it doesn't have you know
the typical background I don't really
believe there is a typical background in
data analytics but Andrew like he said
studied business but you've had an
opportunity to become a lead data
analyst and you know kind of in these
higher updated positions in multiple
different companies and I wanted you to
walk us through the idea of when you're
hiring a data analyst you know what's
really important to stand out as a
candidate what can these listeners do to
stand out in the data analyst job search
yeah my thoughts on this have evolved
over time so the data analyst position
has just grown and grown and grown as
our needs for Quality data analysts have
really permeated every industry so
there's a lot of opportunity there
before when I was new at hiring data
analysts and I was new into Data myself
I really was focused on the technical
skills I was looking at whatever my
stack was like we used Tableau whatever
it is and I was looking for applicants
who match that data stack that's how I
began looking for applicants
now what I look for if I was hiring a
data analyst
I focus much more on the person I look
for somebody who's curious I look for
somebody who's resilient I look for
somebody who's going to mesh well with
the team because data analytics is a
team sport you know one person who just
isn't a team player can really throw off
the whole dynamic and and ultimately the
work and the business insights that
we're trying to drive so less important
to me is your specific technical skill
set you know if you know Tableau really
well and we're using power bi that's
totally fine with me but
you're demonstrating that ability to
learn and some of the ways that you can
do that like Avery always talks about
our projects I love to look at projects
I love to see interesting projects we've
all seen the Titanic data set and I
don't mind if you use that but I want to
see something that you're interested and
passionate about and I want to learn
about that with you
and then if we're interviewing
I really want you to tell that story
because the ability to communicate as a
data analyst is so important you know I
don't want to have to go to the
stakeholders and explain what you were
doing I want you to go and represent
yourself and and present your insights
and build those relationships
so if you can have something you're
passionate about you uncovered some
insights and you can communicate those
in a story and a narrative that's
engaging those are so important those
will really set you apart
okay that's awesome a lot to unpack
there I want to dive a little bit deeper
into it's actually really interesting
because I'm assuming you haven't
listened to the episode I did with Megan
McGuire another data hiring manager you
haven't listened to that one right I
haven't no okay and I'm I'm guessing you
haven't listened to Jesse Morris which
is another data hiring manager that we
recorded on Friday of last week that
hasn't even been posted you didn't
listen to that one either right not that
I know of unless I dreamed it
so the reason I ask is they actually
gave very similar answers I think we as
data analysts candidates often over
index on how much you know the technical
skills matter and the technical skills
do matter but there's people who are
willing to take a chance on you and you
have to show them that you're more than
just you know some NPC I don't even know
what that even what that means right now
what does that mean a non role-playing I
don't even know what it means but it's
like non-player character yeah
non-player character thank you you have
to show some sort of passion some sort
of Personality some sort of Drive some
sort of like differentiator and that can
be even your great your communication
you know what you like about projects
and it's just interesting that we've had
a couple different data hiring managers
on the podcast now and they've all let
off with a very similar message so I
think that's really interesting now you
mentioned you like to see different
types of projects could you maybe like
walk through you mentioned you know the
Titanic data set which maybe is a little
bit overdone in term terms of data
projects people could still do it but
maybe have a unique Twist on it could
you also maybe mention some projects
that you'd like to see
I mean the world is your oyster when it
comes to projects that I'd like to see I
really like Annie Nelson's projects that
she shares about Tableau on LinkedIn her
projects are just so succinct they're
about lots of different topics and she
uses one of my favorite tools figma so
I'm a little biased there but she uses
it so beautifully what I like about it
is the Way She lays out the project and
every topic is so engaging it doesn't
really matter what the topic is
it matters about your passion so if I
was starting over today
and I decided I really want to be a data
analyst and I'm going to build a project
that I want to both showcase who I am
but also my skills and abilities to try
to set myself up for success I would
focus on
I would if I was doing it today now bear
with me I've got I've got some more
machine learning skills so you can use
this as the as inspiration I would pull
sentiment analysis for Twitter
and I would pull sentiment analysis for
Threads and I would run that against a
timeline right now threads hasn't been
around that long but you know all the
all the news I'm seeing is like oh
threads is a positive place and
Twitter's a negative place maybe it's
the new sites I look at so there's bias
there but I'd be able to answer that
question that I'm actually sincerely
interested in
build a dashboard around it I think a
lot of people are interested in that
analysis I build the visuals I'd
annotate it and if I did uncover
a significant difference then I would
make that Insight super clear and
engaging so it's not just the topic and
the tools it's really what did you pull
from it and how are you communicating
that
so if if I was to do that today that
that might be how I would attack it
yeah that's a good point the
presentation is almost more important
than the actual content sometimes in the
the project and it's so funny because
I'm not the best at this in my life but
like if you don't package something like
for instance if it's a Christmas gift
right I'm I'm getting Andrew a Christmas
gift and let's say I bought him a nice
Rolex all right I bought him a really
nice Rolex but I kind of just like put
it in I don't know in like cellophone
wrap and then like throw it in like a
grocery bag and I was like Merry
Christmas Andrew here you go he's not
gonna be very impressed maybe he will be
finally when he opens it up but it looks
more like trash than any sort of gift or
present right and so we really need to
package our projects very effectively
and and present them in a way that is
very attractive that means using cool
visualizations that means using you know
something like canva or figma to try to
create some sort of like designs that
means using bold not just like writing a
a 700 sentence one paragraph story in
your presentation I think the
presentation really matters now I want
to dive into the idea I said Andrew what
type of project would impress you and he
was like well one thing I'm really
curious about right now is and then he
talks about is threads more positive
than Twitter or X or whatever Elon wants
to call it today right and one thing I
really liked I was like Andrew what's a
cool project and he said one thing I'm
curious about if you can really just
answer that question be like one thing
I'm curious about is that usually leads
to a good project do you agree
100 and I think
one Pitfall of data analysts is we get
so passionate about the technology and
the work we put in let's continue on
with this example of sentiment analysis
between the two platforms or like that's
going to take me a little while I'm
going to run nltk I'm going to do all
this python code on the back and nobody
cares they don't care right what went
into it and that's the key to successful
and effective communication is you're
the narrator you're telling the story
people who are looking at your
visualization they're the audience it's
for them so you need to really put aside
the tendency and the temptation to show
how smart you are and focus on what's
the audience going to get out of this
I've seen so many amazing visuals that
are really hard to make but I don't get
anything out of it and I wouldn't if I
was making a hiring decision that
wouldn't push me over the edge to hire
you because it's not a clearly conveyed
Insight you know I need somebody who can
come in and I'm not hiring right now so
don't take it for that but when I'm
hiring I need somebody who can come in
and clearly distill insights and use
their critical thinking but then be able
to create a clear and engaging story
around that and make it super simple but
also engaging and that's a difficult
skill yeah she's not really taught all
that that much inside my boot camp the
data analytics accelerator we do we do
nine different projects the first a are
guided so I'll kind of like give you
kind of the steps that you need to take
of course there's some wiggle room to
kind of go off on your own and change
things a little bit but when one of my
students post this project even though I
explicitly say it's one of the biggest
mistakes is not bluffing is what I like
to call it which is the bottom line up
front and it's like nobody cares a lick
about the project that you did unless
you give them a reason to care and so
like you said if you start you know for
instance going back to your looking at
threads versus Twitter which one is more
positive which one's more negative if
you don't like present that in a way
where it's interesting or if you don't
tell us you know oh look I actually
found that threads on average is 43
percent more positive than Twitter
here's how I actually did it right if
you just start with here's what I did I
downloaded this package I did this and
then I wrote some python code and then I
ran it for 44 days like no one really
cares about the journey it's more about
the destiny Nation now and I I say that
with a one caveat people do care about
the journey but not until you show them
what the destination is and how
luxurious the destination is right
that's right yeah and it depends who
you're presenting to if you're
presenting to a hiring manager or a
recruiter or you're not there you're not
explaining it and they're just looking
at your portfolio online
what are they going to get out of it you
need to think through their eyes through
their lens even even having family
members take a quick look at your
presentation and and see if it confuses
them if it engages them does it follow
that visual hierarchy of bottom line up
front like you said Avery and does it
make vertically
does the vertical Logic support that
bottom line up front that you're saying
because so there's so many applicants
for jobs these days and I remember
posting when I was hiring in a previous
role within like two days there were
like 300 applicants
and I personally wasn't going through
the 300 applications it gets filtered
through whatever systems the recruiter
uses and then the recruiters pull X
number of candidates they phone screen
them and I'm only seeing maybe three to
four people
by the time it finally gets to me so
that filtering process really relies on
on your ability to
be clear and engaging once it gets to me
then there's more Nuance right like we
can talk about it I can understand more
what your methodology was I can give you
more than 30 seconds or 10 seconds or
however long it's taking the recruiter
to decide should I pursue this or should
I not out of whatever stack of
applications that they have so being
able to be super clear and engaging in
just a split second is critical both to
your success you know your first mission
of getting hired and then your second
mission of continued success
yeah that's a good principle to learn in
life in general usually the way we talk
about it in the data analytics
accelerator in your career Journey you
basically have to follow the 10 110 rule
which means if someone's looking at your
LinkedIn your resume or some sort of
project or portfolio you've done you
have 10 seconds to make a meaningful
impression if you're successful in those
10 seconds you will earn one minute more
of that person's time to like continue
scrolling to continue reading to
continue looking at if you succeed in
that one minute you will then earn an
extra 10 minutes for that person to
actually consider you think about you
look at your profile so each one of
those steps you have to be engaging in
10 seconds you have to be engaging in
one minute and then of course you have
to have the whole package in the 10
minutes that's really interesting that's
one of the things that you mentioned is
like you know before it even gets to me
you know someone else has to bring these
people to me and we have to be you know
we have to look good and we have to look
engaging to them another thing that you
mentioned was data analytics is a team
sport I was wondering if you could maybe
dive a little bit deeper into what you
meant by that yeah absolutely you know
data analysts in general I'm sure
there's some exceptions you're part of a
team maybe you have data Engineers on
your team maybe you specialize or focus
on a specific domain but you're all
working together right you all are
individual but together an example may
be let's say you're part of a central
data analytics team you support multiple
business units maybe certain members of
your team support sales and other
Support Compliance and others support
legal and other support marketing but
you're all on the same team
but you're all managing pipelines you're
all helping each other with your
different Specialties you all don't know
Tableau to the same level likely you
don't know DBT to the same level
it's really nice to be able to turn
around and ask like hey
Paul
I'm stuck here I know you've done stuff
like this before can you help me or hey
Avery I have a big presentation to sales
later can you take a look if you're
working in a silo you don't get that
benefit of being able to get that
Synergy where the whole is greater than
its parts right and that's that's where
magic really happens when teams can come
together
share their knowledge and share their
skills and even while working on
individual projects move data analytics
forward and move business objectives and
wins forward it's amazing if you have
somebody who's working in isolation and
it could be the most skilled person on
the team but doesn't contribute to that
team Synergy they're really taking away
from it it really hurts the team so I
think being a team player and being able
to work together
super important it goes in line with
being flexible you as a data analyst
right you might come into the role with
knowing Tableau you might you know be an
Excel Master but maybe let's use the
same example we're in a data analytics
team we're all supporting different
business units maybe sales has chosen to
use power bi and marketing has chosen to
use Tableau that's fairly common we're
in a large Enterprise can have lots of
different tools when I was at JPMorgan I
supported multiple business units and
some used power Pi some use Tableau and
some used click some use microstrategy
and I've never used microstrategy in my
life and there were folks on my team who
had and I could lean over and ask them
how to use it it's so important to be
flexible and be able to learn and be
able to help each other
yeah I love that I I think the team
aspect's really important and then I
also love what you said it it's like
data analytics in general as a career
you're never going to stop learning you
will always be learning something new
always always always and so the ability
to learn is actually way more of an
important skill than any sort of tech
skill you could have SQL Tableau
whatever because for heaven's sakes
Tableau could die tomorrow and you'd
have to learn something else okay I
wanted to ask you actually in terms of
your your current Tech stack or maybe
we'll talk about your Career Tech stack
what tool have you used the most as you
know a data analyst a lead data analyst
a hiring manager Excel Excel is always
there right I wouldn't say it's what
I've used the most robustly but it's at
every single company I've been at excels
there in some kind of way it's always
there I think that's a non-negotiable I
think coming to the table with
understanding and being able to hammer
out Excel and being able to
really quickly prototype things with
your business stakeholders in Excel
excel's the language that business
speaks it just is you need to be able to
to do that
I didn't learn Excel first I learned
python first right like I had basic
Excel skills my python skills were much
better than Excel but as of over the
years just realized like you have to be
a master in Excel in order to be
successful it just is what it is I know
it's a controversial take
no I I like it I think I think it's
worth saying I mean it's survived this
long it's used by business people
non-analytics people's analytics is
Excel right that's what people use I'm
curious what you think in terms of like
mastering Excel what are some of the
like functions or analyzes you know
basic things that listeners should
should check off their list of of being
able to do how about you name one and
then I name one because I kind of I have
my list but I want to hear yours I think
all the text functions are super
important being able to do the regular
expressions and clean your data split
your data in between the different
columns just being able to do that on
the Fly you know I've been working in
business for a long time right and so
much of their stuff's in Excel an
executive will email a sheet or their
assistant will email the sheet and be
like hey make sense of this or clean
this up or like what what do you think
about this you just gotta whip through
it super fast and be able to draw those
insights I could upload it to Tableau or
upload it to power bi or throw it into
Python and and do it but they want to
see it right like they want to see that
underlying work and then we're on the
same page yeah seeing is believing right
so they want to be able to see it okay
so first pick goes to you know text
functions and cleaning I'm going to take
the pivot table I think doing a pivot
table is is pretty useful business
people like a pivot table
oh 100 pivot charts pivot tables super
easy makes you look like a genius
they'll ask you in a meeting hey what's
this you just do it so fast
yeah I love it it's underrated I don't
know if it'll get you hired I'm gonna
say that but I think it is critical for
your success
okay what's your second pick and then
I'll do one one more X lookup for sure
okay yeah I think that was mine I think
everybody uses it you know constantly
yeah I'm still I'm still a little Legacy
I still use a vlookup every once in a
while but yeah just the ability to
basically find stuff based off of other
stuff in your data set I think is very
powerful okay that was mine okay so
Excel you know you've used it a lot
those are some things to learn and Excel
I want to talk a little bit more about
your transition into to data analytics I
know when we talked about when we had
our little pre podcast call you
mentioned that you were already working
at a place where you are already you
know earning a decent chunk of money and
so in your transition you wanted to move
in the data but you also didn't want to
sacrifice any sort of pay so that's a
little bit of unique Journey so can you
walk us through what you did to transfer
and not lose that pay
yeah it was a tightrope walk for me so I
I got married super young and
immediately went into the workforce and
was lucky enough to be able to move up
fairly quickly
I didn't have a college degree
but I was very successful so then I I
went and I finally decided okay it's
time because at that point you know all
my colleagues either had um JD's or
master's degrees and I hadn't even
gotten my bachelor's yet
so I went and got my bachelor's and
really loved the data courses that I was
exposed to
so I turned around and got my MBA while
still continuing to move up in the
company
I found myself in a director level
with this MBA and part of my job was
risk analytics and making decisions
about hey we think this bad risk is
happening make a judgment call on it and
our tools and our processes were super
basic so I started doing some basic
statistical analysis that I had learned
in in my MBA
and it I just felt like I there was so
much I didn't know and I felt like I was
a risk by assessing this risk in a
subpar way yeah so while doing that then
I decided okay I gotta learn data
analytics so I went back and and did a
master's in data analytics while working
I decided that I really wanted to move
into Data but here's the problem I'm
already fairly high up in my career that
was had really nothing to do with data
so I started using every concept that I
learned in my classes every chance I got
I would do statistical analysis I would
build dashboards you know a lot of them
were for myself because I had to make
these like I wasn't presenting it to
anyone I was presenting it to me to make
the Judgment call but I used it at every
chance I could get
and then I fell into the same trap that
most folks applying to entry level data
analyst jobs are faced with is that it
wants three plus years of experience
so I decided you know if I'm going to be
able to transition to a data job that's
going to be able to pay for my family
like I already had multiple kids at this
point high up in my career needed to
maintain that income I'm gonna have to
find some way to get data experience
while maintaining my job
so I actually got a full-time job as a
data analyst at night for a company
while maintaining my full-time job I was
the original overemployed but both
companies were aware like I Didn't Do It
sneaky like I let both companies know
they both knew what my schedule was I
worked 16 hours a day for a couple years
really just building that those data
arms and skills
and maintaining my career and it took
time it really took time to be able to
fully transition but it was worth it to
me because then I was eventually able to
get down to one job and it was in data
but
I would say there's a balance right
there's so many entry-level applicants
so I don't know if that's easier I think
your competition is much greater at the
entry level point but I think The
Balancing Act of trying to get a higher
paying job as your first role in data is
difficult in a different way it was much
more difficult on the personal side
versus the competition side of trying to
get that highly competitive analyst role
okay so you were able to to get that
first analyst role without the Masters
or what where did the Masters come into
play I did have a masters already which
is why I think they took a chance on me
I had an MBA and a masters oh and a
masters in analytics yeah and I I had
networked with that hiring manager for a
while we had connected on LinkedIn I
knew her for about a year before I had
started that job so we knew each other
fairly well I don't think she would have
made the concessions
if we hadn't already had that
relationship she knew me for a year and
she knew that I had another demanding
full-time job
and we were on the same page when it
came to making that transition so it was
tough but she was super supportive and I
don't know if I could have done it with
another manager so the networking was
really key oh 100 if it was a blind
application there's no way I would have
been able to do it because I'm I try to
be 100 upfront and honest and both
companies knew at least my I don't know
who my manager told but she knew and the
other company I was working for knew you
know the business hours were set I
wasn't doing any data analytics during
my other job and I wasn't doing my other
job during data analytics time both were
aware but like who's going to take a
chance on you doing that without
understanding who I am
if I come in that blindly you'll be like
I'm just going to get a normal person
who doesn't have these weird requests
this outlandish you know thing he's
already established in his career and
now he wants to work two full-time jobs
and he's gonna work 16 hour days it
sounds so odd but then once when you
have that context in that relationship
it makes life a lot easier
yeah if you were to tell me that you
landed your first day of job as a second
job working at night I wouldn't believe
you so yeah that is like a kind of an
unusual but hey we're all unusual in
this world so very cool story and like
you said the networking played a big
role the best time to plant your
networking tree was 20 years ago 10
years ago or a long time ago like Andrew
said but the next best time is today if
you are not posting on LinkedIn if
you're not making connections on
LinkedIn if you're not commenting on
LinkedIn if you're not posting on
LinkedIn start doing it because that
network will carry you to your next job
and then likely the job after that and
I've seen that with not only myself but
many of my students and many guests like
Andrew I think that's the lesson we've
all got our own circumstances and we all
have struggles and it's demanding and
many of your listeners are probably
studying data analytics at night which
is just as hard as having a second job
right like you're hammering out your
normal work all day and now you got to
come home and study and practice and
it's frustrating trading and people on
stack Overflow are mean but it's
possible and you just gotta have support
of people like Avery who's showing you
can do it here's success stories and
keep that motivation
yeah for sure it is possible but it's
hard it's definitely hard the cool thing
is that it's possible the not cool thing
is you got to put in the time but I mean
not like anything in life right you have
to put in the time if anything's free
it's probably not as good as you think
it is so I love it Andrew what other
advice would you give to aspiring data
professionals
I think networking is key you really
just need to get and it's not just
networking up right it's not just trying
to talk to recruiters and hiring
managers it's just as if not more
important to network out into folks in
your same circumstance who are trying to
upskill who are trying to get that first
data analytics job so that you can
develop that community and support each
other whether it's a boot camp that has
a good Discord or you know you find
folks on LinkedIn or in your community
you really need that support and the
benefit is now your your knowledge
sharing what worked for somebody they
can share that with 20 people now you
don't have to live in isolation and try
to learn these lessons on your own you
can benefit from the knowledge of 10 20
you know 100 people to help you on your
journey
I love it the community is such a good
aspect so whether that's through some
sort of Discord like Andrew said or
whether that's inside our community
inside the data analytics accelerator
having that Community is a big part of
your data Journey don't do it alone
there's no need Andrew thanks so much
for coming on the Pod we really
appreciate it thanks Avery pleasure if
you're looking to make the pivot from
whatever your career is into data
analytics I highly recommend my program
the data analytics accelerator we have a
lot of fun in the program and there's
over 350 other aspiring data
professionals on the same Journey as you
I'll teach you everything that you need
to know I'll help you get your LinkedIn
Network and your resume all sorted and
then of course I'll give you all the
projects and portfolios you could ever
need in this data Journey if you want
more information you can find it down
below in the show notes have a good week
everyone

Title: He‚Äôs Hired 30 Data Analysts; Here‚Äôs What You Should Know

Description: Join me and the man who has interviewed 300 data analysts, Jesse Morris, in this episode as we discuss what it is like to get hired as a data analyst. 

Throughout the episode, Jesse imparts golden nuggets of wisdom, shedding light on what employers seek in prospective candidates, why being a data analyst is awesome, and what tools you should use along the way. 

Tune in now! üéß

Connect with Jesse Morris: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jessemorris1/


Timestamps:
05:53 - The Data Analyst Hiring Process üíé
17:48 - Attitude, passion, & communication ‚ãó Technical Skills üòé
25:03 - Things you can do to stand out in the job hung üìà
31:44 - Volunteering for a non-profit can help you land a job ü§ù


Video Transcript:
a lot of people on the internet give
data analytics career advice but very
few are as qualified as my guest today
Jesse Morris Jesse has been the data
space in leadership roles for a long
time he's been in the trenches doing the
day of work himself and he's also built
out and managed data teams in this
episode of data career podcast he will
tell us what he has learned and what
knowledge he would give you as an
aspiring data professional after
interviewing over 300 data analyst
candidates and hiring over 30. I'll tell
you the three ways that you can send out
why typically he hires a data analyst
first before any other roles and much
more so let's go ahead and hop into this
episode welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job here's your host Avery Smith
Our Guest today is Jesse Morris I'm
calling him the man who's interviewed
300 data analysts Jesse has lots of
experience on his resume from all over
in the data World lots of different
companies I went to his LinkedIn and
there was like 16 different places of
experience all related to data so he has
a lot of data experience his most recent
role is a senior vice president of
Revenue operations on solve which was
something that was really exciting to
talk to Jesse about when we talked
before this call so Jesse welcome to the
podcast we're so glad you're here yeah
thanks for having me great to be here
with all you guys so I was looking at
your LinkedIn experience and you
obviously have so much experience on
this resume of yours a lot of these
roles I'll just read some of these roles
for the audience we have the director of
analytics and business operations you've
been a Founder you've written a book
you've been a financial planner an
analyst you've been a data analyst like
you've had so many different titles and
in those positions you've had the chance
to interview and hire a lot of of data
analysts so I know when we talked
originally you thought maybe the
ballpark was interviewing 300 analysts
is that still kind of what you're
thinking yeah I think it's been around
300 and probably hired about 30 analysts
in my career so that's a lot that's a
lot more than me and a lot more than
most people I think and so today I
wanted to dive in with Jesse and kind of
talk through you know when he's
interviewing these 300 analysts you know
what's been going through his mind so
first off I'll start off with these
roles that you're hiring like if I know
it's hard to remember all these
different roles but how many of them
would you say were pure data analysts
how many of them were like business
intelligence Engineers tell us a little
bit more about the titles that you've
hired for in your career yeah that's a
great question you know most of my roles
have been building my most my current
role right now I actually inherited most
the team but prior to that a lot of mine
has been building out data teams for
companies and so the progression I
normally hire for when I'm building out
a data team is I generally hire an
analyst first and my first 30 days and
then interestingly enough a data
engineer is typically my first 60 to 90
days and then after that I'll follow it
up with another one or two analyst and
then maybe a year maybe two in depending
on how well in advance we are on the
data side I'm hiring a data scientist at
that point and so those are generally
the main roles on the data side I also
obviously I lead Revenue operations so I
also hire a bunch of business and
systems analysts as well which I I do
think there's a difference there but but
all obviously all have similar skill
sets but slightly different areas of
focus okay that's super interesting
because you know a lot of people
probably would hire like would want to
hire like a data scientist beforehand or
something like that so can you tell us
why you want to start with the analyst
role yeah I mean ultimately you know
data it's one of those things that's it
sounds great to a lot of companies
they're like oh we want data the reality
is especially when building is you don't
typically find good data when you start
but at the same time you've got to
establish value quickly because at the
end of the day you know a lot of times a
lot of my roles you know I've actually
pitched I pitched my role there was no
job posted there was no nothing I
actually went to like CEOs and leaders
of companies and I said hey I love data
here's what I'm passionate about do you
guys need what I do and so that's
actually I think two out of my two of my
data roles that's actually how I got
them was there was literally no job post
that I just wrote a business case for it
and so part of that is you know they're
committing to me hey I'm going to give
you a budget to build this thing out I'm
committing that I'm going to start
showing you value as quickly as possible
and so the idea here early on is how do
we get you know excel's our best friend
as an analyst I buy a long shot
especially when you're starting off and
so it really is about getting those
quick wins early on trying to build the
Rapport build the trust which in turn
you know is how you get more funds and
more confidence and I think a lot of it
too is fact finding like you know you
think about when you're trying to build
data infrastructure out you have to
actually know the business pretty well
and so it takes some time to ramp and so
I want to get an analyst in as soon as
possible to try to get them wrapped
similar to me so we can go out and
really support the organization but
really I would say it's mostly around
value and learning and going from there
yeah that that makes a lot of sense it's
like it's really cool because really at
the end of the day you as a data analyst
you're making the biggest impact on the
business the quickest right it's like
the fastest Roi the fastest return on
investment is a data analyst because the
data analyst is going to tell you hey
our data actually kind of sucks hey you
know we don't have that much data or hey
this is the data we do have you know
these are some quick insights that I
found you know let's run with these
let's see what we can you know what we
can generate value-wise for these so I
think it's pretty telling that you'd
prefer to hire
a data analyst at first like that's
really important I think all these
people who want to become data analysts
should be pretty proud of that right
yeah and I think I mean ultimately you
know all roles have value in the data
team they're super important but an
analyst really is that boosts your shot
for lack of a better word you know I
think the combination of working
together and again ultimately you know
it's not data for the sake of data I
think that's the biggest thing I've
learned in my career is you know I I can
geek out on data most of us on this
probably can geek out on data for hours
those in the business you know they do
want to see value and ultimately you
might spend days and find 100 data
points that are super fascinating but
they might only care about two of those
and I think that's really where analysts
can really shine and stand out and make
impacts really early on is like what is
the most pertinent most important
information that has the highest value
to the company today that ultimately
maybe leads to even more value on Down
the Line yeah and that's a phrase that
you actually use when we were when we
talked on the phone originally as well
is not doing data for data sake and it's
something I'm a huge fan of because
especially when we're practicing and
we're doing these projects and we're
getting into things sometimes it can
feel like we're doing data for data's
sake they're like oh yeah I'm going to
make a tableau dashboard well why
because I want to show it off but you
need to be in the mindset of no we're
actually every time we do data we're
doing it to drive value we're trying to
generate some sort of you know
whatever's important in our business
whether that's you know whether that's
money whether that's sustainability
whether that's happiness like whatever
it is like we're trying to do data
analytics to solve and generate
information that's one thing I really
like about your experience section like
right now you're a data person but your
title is senior vice president Revenue
operations right like you know you've
done technology systems in the past like
some of your roles director of sales
compensation those don't like Scream the
word data to me they don't use the word
data in them they don't use the word
analyst in them but I think your whole
point here is what he's been able to do
in your career is how do I use data to
run businesses right is that true I
think it's exactly it I mean ultimately
the move for me at least from kind of I
would say you know leading analytics and
business intelligence teams are really
like that was a it was actually a very
strategic move on my part to move more
into the revenue operations was because
again I really wanted to tie value to
insights I think those two things are
directly related and in the system side
of it the reality is that is your data I
mean the reality is good business
process good systems design is what
gives us on the analysis side good data
to ins you know ultimately Drive
insights and so to me it was the ability
to honestly control the data input which
in turn allows you know the driving of
the output because I mean even today you
know my title I do a lot of leadership
stuff I spend a lot of time with board
and Leadership teams and companies but
you know a lot of my time I still spend
is doing data I mean I spent last week I
built two two models last week so I'm
still you know I still get to be in it
which I love I like still being able to
geek out and do some of these more
technical things so that doesn't it's
not like because I've moved in more
leadership roles I've left that behind I
actually think there are certain
projects that I I just happen to know
more now and so I've been able to
leverage that time and experience and
perspective that's the big thing I
always like to talk about is perspective
and data is everything and so
understanding perspective what that
really means is who's asking the
question who is the audience for this
and what do they care about ultimately
and so I think for me it's really been
the ability to kind of marry all those
together but to be quite Frank daner's
data's at the center of it all yeah
that's really neat I love that
perspective from you and I think it's
one that's not talked about enough in an
industry so okay we're doing data for
you know value's sake we want to hire a
data analyst so in the past when you've
hired data analysts would you say most
of them were kind of entry level or
maybe like mid-level or senior level
what was the breakdown of those hires
yeah I think early on it was more around
all over the board I would say these
days I tend to mostly lean towards
hiring senior data analysts especially
at the beginning because ultimately like
I work so and I think that really
matters is what size of Industry you're
working so my company we're a 400
employee company so we're a mid-level
SAS soft software as a service company
and so that's generally my sweet spot
um for size and so that's important
because I think the the larger the
company is the more mix you're going to
have between junior mid and Senior
because you've got the ability to kind
of I'll call it Mentor people up and so
might be in a team even today is pretty
small like I got two data analysts that
are working directly with me on a
day-to-day basis and so it's really just
me and two-day analysts for the whole
company you know that are driving data
for that and so I expect these days a
little bit higher level of expertise
within it you know at this point though
let's say next year I go to hire another
analyst that's when I would start
looking actually at hiring more of a
junior or mid-level because then I've
got my two senior people that can
actually then mentor and help grow that
you know part of the challenge is time
right and so for me I don't have the
time time capacities a day to Mentor as
much as I used to early on but that's
where your senior data analysts are
phenomenal is you can get them really
established you hire really great people
they can really move that up and so you
know at this point my career I've been
more focused on that earlier on I used
to hire honestly you know pretty Junior
individuals and I had some great
successes with it it takes more time to
ramp and get people up to speed but you
know I think that's really where you
know you talk if you think about like
what are the attributes you look for an
analyst in you know technical chops is a
piece of that it's actually not the most
important one and I think that's what
I'm always looking for is like those
really key skill sets behind it and so
to me it's more about like phase size of
company and also for me as a leader how
much capacity do I have to maybe pour
into you know an analyst going forward
no I think that's a really good point it
does depend on how large the company is
right because like you said you build
out a lot of data teams if you're
building out a lot of data teams
especially at a company that maybe
hasn't had a data team because they
haven't necessary really felt the need
or believed in it you're pressured to
get a return on your investment quickly
so that you have validity to your team
and so you probably don't want to be
hiring someone entry level for that
position because they're not going to
get results as quickly as someone who
has experience so that makes sense of
like now as smaller companies you're
probably focused more on the senior
roles especially when you're building
out those teams maybe if it's a small
company that only does like Consulting
for example and all 400 people are data
analysts then they have those mentors
available that that does make sense
exactly when you mentioned earlier in
your career you have you know worked
with some entry-level data analysts a
lot of people who are listening to this
are intro level analysts you know hoping
for companies like you when you've hired
some of those entry-level people what
stood out the most to you in those
hiring processes yeah that's a great
question and I think you know if you
take anything from today's conversation
I think it's around this and you know
again I think it gets lost you've got to
be the most technical in the room or you
know your ability to build a dashboard
and make it a work of art you know
that's like the most I actually don't
think that's the case and I actually
think Avery you and I talked about this
about like how a lot of teachers make
great analysts and I think there's a lot
of Truth to that because ultimately when
I think when it boils down to it really
it's it's a couple of key things one
it's the ability to tell stories and be
succinct and that is not that's not just
a data skill set that's a life skill set
you know if you look actually my
original background is in sales like I
actually I should say my second job my
first job was I was a data analyst and
then I realized I needed to get
presentation skills on the ability to
tell stories so I went into sales for a
few years and so I think you know that
skill set the ability but I think you
can get that in a myriad of ways you
could be a great writer you could
there's there's so many different ways
you could get that skill set but I think
that's such a big one especially you
know a lot of my time is spent
communicating to Executives into
leadership teams into boards like I
spend a lot of time telling stories to
the board and that's really key is that
ability to kind of boil things down into
here's the most important and then you
can work back ultimately like people
when they get curious about data that's
when they start asking kind of your next
layer of questions and you you can make
that you can bring that Curiosity to
life through storytelling the other one
which is probably a little bit uh less
common you want here but this is
something that just continues to even
today even with senior analysts it
doesn't matter what level of analyst you
are but tenacity and mental toughness
wow so that's a really funny one uh
tenacity to me like in my world I work
in these smaller called startup type
technology companies and so we're moving
at really fast pace but we don't get
weeks to work on projects so if you work
in any large corporate companies you're
going to get that and that's okay I
think ultimately it's good to know like
what are what type of environment you're
in and so if you don't work necessarily
well under pressure and some of these
things I'm about to talk about that's
okay then you're probably maybe better
designed to work at larger companies
where you're given the freedom to like
sit down and work on things for weeks
the the environment I work in we're not
given that time and so the ability to
you know change prioritization on a dime
to juggle nine different projects at
once if you talk to my data analysts
today like this is the reality like we
this week we came into the week with a
plan and by Monday afternoon you know
it's Monday morning during our stand up
and by Monday afternoon that plan got
halfway derailed right and so it's a
re-prioritization game and that's not
for everybody I mean I think ultimately
you know that's a tough thing to wrap
your head around and I get frustrated
and I think you and I talked about this
before but it's that like knowledge of I
understand what perfect looks like or
really phenomenal looks like but I also
understand what good enough is and I
think that skill set that's a really
important one and that's not like you
know I'm going to learn this by watching
s y and z I think that's something that
you actually have to work towards and
build up that that mental toughness I
actually think failure you know it's
easy to look at a resume and be like Oh
all this stuff went great I was a
Founder you know in a tech company
good for me I also failed at that tech
company right I learned a lot of things
through trial and error and that I think
it's the same for all of us and so those
would be some of the things I think that
really stand out to me when you boil
down to like some of the key pieces
behind it it's an attitude right like
it's that willingness to say hey I
messed up here and that's okay like what
did you learn from it how do we make it
better how can I help but I think you
know those are ultimately some of the
when you boil it down some of the things
that I look for no matter what stage
you're at within it and then I think you
know specifically on the starting out
analyst in particular you know I think
just again perspective is an interesting
one but did you have a sales background
or did you work for I mean maybe you're
working in retail did you work for
Banana Republic during college uh where
you was like all of those things
perspective and data is everything and
what I mean by that is like your ability
to speak into it from the person who's
asking the question or the Departments
or the leaders that are asking the
questions because as long as you've got
just that various perspective that
actually has a lot more value I think
sometimes the technical even does yeah
and I hope people just heard what you
said because I think that's very
impactful you know just to kind of
rehash some of it it's not necessarily
how technical you are that lands you the
job because I think you said this phrase
when we first originally talked that the
technical stuff is kind of expected
that's like you you have it or you kind
of don't right and it's really your
storytelling your grit your attitude
that separates you which I think for all
of you guys listening who want to be
aspiring data analysts that should be
really rewarding because you can have
grit you can be you know you can be
authentic you can try hard you can have
passion you can become a good you know
Storyteller those aren't like necessary
like you have to be spending 25 years of
your life in SQL to know how to master
everything right that's really in my
opinion enlightening and refreshing to
hear because it can't be like I think
most people take the data career job
hunt way too skill heavy of course
skills are important right but like
they're not everything and I think you
kind of just said that basically they're
not everything yeah I mean it's the
thing like if you if I look at my
interviews I've had even this year
you know again technical is either
expected or I also know that like I'll
give you the example we use all tricks a
lot today in my current company and
that's partly because I'm a huge Optics
fan I don't work in SQL as much I like
the visual nature of all tricks I know
that somebody who knows SQL can learn
all tricks or somebody who's phenomenal
Excel can learn on trips and so I hired
an analyst this year who didn't know
office tricks like that's a really
pivotal tool for us but I was willing to
forgo like this hey you got to have this
technical expertise in this area because
I knew they could learn it like that's
something they can learn the things that
are a lot much harder to teach
um when you're trying to get ramped up
quick are some of these other areas
we've talked about and so I do think
like yeah I think you're totally right
everybody put so much emphasis on the
technical not minimizing it there's
definitely importance there but it's not
everything and ultimately it's not what
stands out and gets you it might help
you get the interview it's not how it's
going to get you the job yeah I love
that I think that's a really good
example out of curiosity on that job
hiring I don't know if you if you knew
this or if you even remember but what do
you think that job description said in
terms of alteryx did it say like has to
have alteryx required or did it not say
that no it actually I very remember very
specifically what it said because I
actually wrote it but it said you either
had to have two years of SQL or alteryx
experience all tricks preferred and so
that's for a senior role like again I
think a lot of people out there would
have written a lot more SQL experience
for example my first senior role and you
think I only wrote two years into that
and that just shows you like how much
again I don't index technical is
important but I don't index there that's
not the main thing again it's these
other things we've talked about that is
the piece that and it just it's hard to
find people that can do that ultimately
yeah I think that's interesting I think
that was a great bullet point on the job
description I don't think other people
are maybe as careful as you were in that
process and I think a lot of the times
the people who ultimately make the
hiring decisions are not necessary
really the ones writing those right
those job descriptions and stuff like
that so sometimes I think there are
people like you that make hiring
decisions that are like yeah we're gonna
use ultrix in this job but like you can
figure it out it's not too hard to learn
but sometimes I think there's job
descriptions that get written for those
managers whether it's just a recruiter
or maybe it's policy I don't know what
it is but they'll say like you need 25
years of ultra experience and I I just
think sometimes that even though it says
that just try because you'll never know
like obviously you need to have at least
you can't just like have zero SQL
experience and Zero Ultra experience
like you have to know one of them you
have to like be comfortable with working
with one of them but I think sometimes
people are are so afraid to apply to
jobs they reject themselves before
letting the hiring manager reject them I
think that's really valid and if you
look at my resume my background I don't
meet the requirements for a lot of
things that I'm hiring for and that
should be a testament to again I don't
think to your point I would never
qualify for certain companies as even a
senior data analyst today right and so
that's that but that's okay with me
because again I I've narrowed my market
the area that I like to play and the
things that I really care about that I
value so I think it again it depends
obviously the more the larger the
company the more corporate uh rules
they're going to have to abide by right
they're going to have levels and things
like that and so their their job
descriptions are probably going to be
required to be a little bit more forced
into certain things but I do think like
you know take note of that if you look
on LinkedIn at my profile like I didn't
necessarily have all the years of
experience it took to be in the role and
I think that's something important to
note is again it's not you know It
ultimately is not always about those
technical things again they're important
you've got to have the ability but I was
able and in the couple roles like I
didn't technically qualify for I still
applied and I literally like networked
my way through it using LinkedIn mostly
and then whenever it came down to like
hey it was always a concern you don't
have a lot of technical skill sets here
I don't see five years of SQL that's our
minimum why do you think you can do the
job and I had a way to actually show
here's the value I bring you know so
again it's just oh it's like sales 101
it's overcoming objections and how you
do it and ultimately again you know what
are they trying to get out of the role
what's the pain point they're solving
for that's really what you're trying to
help solve when you're getting hired for
a role more than necessarily the other
components within it yeah I really like
that because it's like one thing that we
really talk about in my boot camp the
data analytics accelerator is I'm
helping a lot of people that don't have
traditional backgrounds land data jobs
and yeah we're not going to have it the
the two years experience for instance in
the role that you mentioned but what we
try to do is we try to come to the table
prepared knowing that we don't have it
knowing they're gonna say you don't have
it but we like to say well we do have
this we offer them our portfolio
projects like look you know we've
actually done SQL projects with Hospital
data you guys deal with Hospital data
like here's a whole project about how I
was thinking through this Hospital data
and solve it using SQL which is I've
never really worked with at a real job
but at least I've done this project so I
think you know providing some tangible
evidence or some like hey this is what
I'm going to do can be really impactful
when you don't have that experience no I
mean I think if you look at my first
director job that was how I got it I did
I literally got my masters in analytics
I was actually in the middle of my
program that was my first time learning
SQL and but what I did have is I'd done
a big project for a non-profit and I was
able to use that as an example of how I
can help companies use data to drive
decision making and that was all I had
like I literally had nothing else I
would not have passed their SQL test but
I had something that was tangible that
showed value and that was ultimately
like that was ultimately what landed me
the job so I think that's exactly it is
I think your portfolios you are creating
those have tremendous value as long as
it's tied back to again valued right
like what is how does this translate
into pensional value you could generate
for my company and and this is a spoiler
alert data's been around for a long time
the irony behind that though is do you
know how many companies and not just
like Mom and Pop companies haven't
figured this out there is a lot of
companies that need what you all are
trying to do that's like 100 full stop
so even if you don't see a job posted on
LinkedIn again as I said earlier like I
networked and it's not like I have the
strong network of people I know like I
like figured out through Linkedin
different ways to get it up there I
contributed it like a sales process but
they need it and I think that's
something that's good to know is like
there are companies that have very well
established data functions but there's
other companies that know they need it
they want it they just don't know how to
actually start and I think that's where
even somebody who's early in their data
career to provide value pretty quickly
is again just if you can learn where
those pain points are yeah that's really
interesting well and this goes back to
what you're saying earlier about your
background you don't have to know
everything about everything right and
like you have this little like Niche
where you're doing you know sales
operations and revenue analytics right
which is not something that's talked
about a lot and you know it really well
and like maybe you don't know
I don't know some other part of
analytics maybe you don't know SQL that
well right but it like it doesn't really
matter if you're able to generate value
in your part of the world right and so
even when we have like for instance we
have a lot of teachers that go through
my program and you touched on this
earlier as well but if if you are a
teacher you know the education World
better than me right like I don't know
anything I mean now I'm kind of an
educator but like you get the point like
I don't know anything about school
systems I don't really know anything
about teaching in a formal classroom and
that's like subject matter expertise
that you gained over years that for
instance if you apply to a data analyst
job within a school system or within
some sort of online learning platform
you're going to bring that expertise to
the table and know more about it than me
and if they hire me you know I might be
a little bit better at analytics than
you but like it's going to take me a
while to actually figure out all of the
domain and subject matter expert that
you've been learning for years so like
your past does have value in the data
world it's just sometimes hard to
recognize it because we think you're SQL
skills equals how good of a data analyst
you are and that's partially true maybe
but it's not entirely true and I think
that's exactly it I think you hit the
nail on the head there is you know if
you think about it ultimately everybody
that starts a job doesn't know
everything about that job so you might
have the industry experience you might
have the domain knowledge you might have
the technical chops but there's still
something everybody's got to learn and
so when I'm looking at a candidate I'm
taking that into consideration so for
those of you who work in education for
example there's a company here in Denver
I don't even know what what it's not a
non-profit but it's something like a
non-profit called Guild education
they're like crushing the whole
education space right now that would be
a great example of like you know you
could apply your background and you
might not have a ton of experience but
you have passion for the space and
honestly passion plays a huge role in
all this I've Got Confidence and passion
like those two things go interchangeably
you got a passion for the space and
you've got domain knowledge those are
those are things that you'd have to
learn you went you know somewhere else
and so there's exactly your point Avery
there's value in that and so again like
lean into the areas that you are strong
and again ultimately it comes back to
how is that going to provide value for
the company yeah I might need to get
better at SQL you know Mr Mrs employer
but I do bring this other areas of
experience that is going to really be
helpful for you that you're not going to
have to train me in you're not going to
have to build my confidence in mind it
yeah plus like I mean sql's been here a
long time sql's not going away but other
data tools you know they come and go and
competitors come and they're better
products in them like I don't know how
long alterix has been around but like I
feel like it's been the last like three
years I've really seen a boom right and
who knows three years from now there
might be dinosaurs Rex that's a way
better platform than ultrix right like
and the idea is in your data career
you're never going to stop learning so
the idea that you enjoy learning that
you're passionate about it and you're
willing to do it I think it's sometimes
the Marquee aspect of a good data
analyst because you're going to have to
learn five more things in your career
right no I would completely agree I mean
I actually I think that's why I chose
the space to be honest is I love
learning and I always think about things
as like learning curves and for me I'm
always looking for like the steepest
curve and so when my curve starts to
flatten out that's where I start getting
bored and looking for the next challenge
but I think that's the beautiful thing
about our industry in my industry I mean
data like it is never ending learning
opportunity you can learn more about
again different perspectives so I I
might know sales data really well but do
I know marketing data I might know
software utilization data but do I know
product there's just so many different
Avenues on the data side that I don't
know that's what I get super jazzed
about when I think about it is just it
is a never-ending learning and to your
point tools come and go Excel is
probably the most stable in SQL is
probably right behind that but you know
outside of those two things ultimately
like you know all of this thing is going
to continue especially with the Advent
of chat TBT and the whole world that's
opened up on the data side but again
what ultimately like that just is great
opportunity for us to continuously learn
which is so exciting yeah it is it is
really fun I wanted to ask you about
that non-profit project you you did if
you don't mind because that's sometimes
I get asked you know how do I get
experience without getting experience
right and by Solutions projects and you
know you basically just did a project
for a non-profit I think non-profits can
be great because they have obviously
operation General needs and not a whole
lot of budget and so if you can offer to
you know help them out with something
that usually will take it that being
said if 40 people ask them hey can we do
data analytics from you it's probably
hard for them to manage that so could
you if you don't mind speak to like how
did you find this company did you know
someone did you reach out on LinkedIn
yeah so I worked with this non-profit
for a numbers as a volunteer so I had a
passion for what they were doing and I
saw a need as like just being you know
being a volunteer in the non-profit and
so ultimately like once I saw that need
I again networked my way in I didn't
know like I knew kind of you could call
it lower level in the non-profit and so
it was just like hey I got this idea I'd
love to just dig into it for you all I
don't even actually I didn't even charge
for that project but the project landed
me one of the biggest you know stepping
stones in my career ever but I didn't
charge for it and ultimately like what I
had what I did still is I had to network
my way in and essentially pitch them on
the idea of like hey here's the
questions because again in data it's
always what questions are we trying to
answer you know what that's ultimately
like what we're doing as analysts is
what are the questions or questions
we're really trying to get to so I
literally just put together I think a
three slide presentation of hey here's
the questions that I think you all would
be really helpful if you could answer
um here's the data that would be really
helpful for me to be able to help you
answer that question and then here's
kind of a rough timeline of how quickly
I think I could turn it around so it
showed like because a lot of times you
work for free you know the challenge is
like people are like well I'm just gonna
I'm gonna put all this work to gather
data for you which is a lot of work
let's call it is gathering data is
brutal a lot of times and so I wanted to
show to them like I was committed to
actually executing and delivering and
ultimately like our ability to execute I
mean if you ask me like what's the
number one thing in my career it's my
ability to actually that's why people
hire me is because I'm really good at
like executing and but that's ultimately
what it is that was how I mapped it out
and I literally pitch it to them and
they're like you're right that is a huge
pain point for us man if you could and
and all I asked I said all I ask this is
at the end of it is you let me use this
as a case study as I'm going to look for
another job and if you like what you see
maybe you know maybe you hire me for
some other Consulting work which I
actually got some Consulting work out of
later on that was the intent like that
was how I did the whole thing and it was
a lot of fun it was a good learning
opportunity and I actually found stuff
like that was the you know the tough
thing in data too sometimes is like
sometimes you just don't find stuff yeah
sometimes they're just not telling you
anything and there's something there
right it actually confirms maybe what
they had thought and there is actually
value in not finding anything but
sometimes that's a little unnerving for
those of us on the data side of like oh
man I just spent 40 hours on this and I
didn't find anything again there's value
in that it just maybe confirms what we
already knew which allows us to make
more confident decisions than we were
before I really like that because a lot
of people will try to do non-profit work
but they kind of want well first off
they like kind of limit their search to
you know data Pro Googling data projects
for nonprofits and I think that there's
High competition there I like that you
did an in person like you knew the
people I think that plays a really big
roles you're going to get a higher
quality of project and probably a higher
chance of actually Landing the project
by knowing the people and I think and
maybe I'm wrong but I think everyone
knows one person that works at a
non-profit at least right like my
sister-in-law she works at a non-profit
I mean she knows that I do data but if I
would have gone to her and been like hey
I want to do a data project for your
company she would have jumped at it
because they have no employees basically
so like I think that's really impactful
and then it like you said it was a huge
jump start to your career and ultimately
like that's a really good Consulting
project and you do Consulting now we
didn't really mention that early but you
do data Consulting on the side like that
was a big play so even though it took a
lot of work at the beginning it was
probably worth it for you big time in
the career oh yeah Roi on that is more
than paid for so I mean ultimately again
it was what allowed me to overcome the
lack of technical experience was that I
mean that was it like you know when it
came down to it it was like Jesse we
really like what you have to say we
think you could really help our company
we have one concern here's the concern
and I was able to be like here let me
address your concern let me show you the
type of value I can provide and I mean I
got a call it was like the next day from
the company like you're hired this was
awesome like yes please come do this for
us so again it cost me a fair amount of
time and but I mean the yeah the ri back
when it was probably one of the more
impactful things I've done in my career
and honestly it was a lot of fun
ultimately like I love what I get to do
I'm probably one of those weird Geeks
that actually really enjoys what we get
to do day in and day out I mean I love
solving problems so for me it wasn't
necessarily work it was more of a fun
project to learn something about an area
that I was passionate about but yeah I
mean the translation is pretty awesome
yeah that actually really resonated with
me because you know I got about five
LinkedIn messages a day hey Avery a lot
of times they call me Madame I don't
know why but they'll call me they'll say
like hey Avery sir slash Madame like
this is who I am do you want to hire me
and I'm like you should check out my
company I don't really hire people
really but you know I get a lot of these
messages
and what I think if someone came to me
and said hey Avery you know I listen a
lot of people are gonna listen to this
podcast so do it I guess if you want to
do it but don't 100 million people come
spam me but if you said hey very like I
love the podcast I'm a fan of your
podcast like I've actually you know I've
done some research on podcast analytics
and I realized like you know it's really
hard for you to rank your episode views
or your attention on each episode that
must be a big problem like I think I
could help solve it like would you mind
like giving me access to your data it's
like so I could create a retention
dashboard for you or something like if
you came to me and presented a problem
Not only would I well at first I'd
probably be like yeah sure like I don't
know if I can pay you but you can say
that you're a data analyst for my
company all if you need a reference I'll
be a reference right but honestly if you
do a good job there's a chance that I
would pay you or like in fact and not
someone looking for a job but someone
looking for a side hustle was like Hey I
want to do podcast analytics and like I
almost paid that person right I was like
all right that sounds interesting sure
do it so I think when you come with the
solution I think that's really powerful
because like you said especially now
when you're so busy your thinking time
is valuable and thinking of a project
for someone else to solve is kind of
exhausting but if they come to you hey
this is a problem you're probably facing
am I right this is how I think I can
solve it do you have data that's a
different proposition to try to solve it
is and it demonstrates a level of again
of value right ultimately it's hey I'm
bringing some they're bringing some
disabled versus just asking me for my
time because ultimately time is the
thing I think that everybody has to
fully understand like that's our most
valuable asset and it doesn't change
that necessarily the word obviously I'm
just more aware of it today than I was
you know five years ago but yeah it's a
way to it's a great it's exactly it how
do you cut through the noise and stand
out and I think you're right like it's
it it demonstrates a level of knowledge
of pain feeling and potentially value
that you can bring and to your point
whether you're getting paid for or not
there's a lot of other value that comes
out of things whether it's to your point
or referral or a LinkedIn you know
recommendation or there's so many
different ways or an introduction you
know all of those things I got asked
this week for an intro and like I didn't
know the person but you know if I know
like I don't what's my name I gotta put
on so I think you're right there's a ton
of value you can get out of that and to
your point cut through the noise that's
awesome so I think to summarize what
I've kind of learned from this is your
technical skills are maybe not as
important as you think they are your
interpersonal skills your grits your
ability to think your ability to
communicate your ability to to sell a
story to talk to someone initially to
make a connection is almost What will
What has helped you and I would add what
has helped me you know in my career be
able to grow and thrive in a way and so
hopefully for all of our listeners they
can take away the same idea and try to
implement that in their life Jesse thank
you so much for being on the podcast do
you have any final words that you want
to say to anyone trying to land a data
job or just to re-emphasize one of your
points yeah I know we appreciate you
having me on I think the last thing I'll
leave you with is all this is love what
you do you get one life one opportunity
I'm gonna give you an Eminem quote there
but you know at the end of the day that
comes through you know your passion for
what we get to do day and enough you
really want to be in this space that
comes through and people pick up on that
and they know that and so I think if you
follow that you work really hard you
have that grit determination again you
like as I said earlier I most of my
roles they weren't published they
weren't there I worked really hard to
get you know it looks like overnight
success when you look at my resume but
it wasn't it was a lot of strategic
thinking and hard work and I think
that's the thing I would just leave you
with is if you're feeling frustrated or
like you're just not getting the
traction you want I think again you can
figure out a way to get there and I
think get creative try different things
and and I do think that ultimately
that's how I've made it my parents
hopefully you can find some value there
awesome Jesse Morris everyone you can
check out his information in the show
notes Down Below in the description and
Jesse thanks so much for being on the
bus yeah thanks for having me on all
right pretty awesome episode huh thanks
Jesse again for being on the podcast and
I hope you guys as listeners can take
away some of the things that I took away
from our conversation like what it
actually means to be a good data analyst
candidate it's not necessarily your Tech
skills but you have the passion do you
have the Grits do you have the
storytelling are you able to communicate
effectively you know do you have some
sort of experience from a different
background that can make you a strong
candidate I hope that inspires you and
makes you excited to break into the data
analytics Fields because it means that
you can do it and I really believe that
you guys can do this data Journey I'm
here to help you as well I hope you guys
are enjoying the podcast and if you want
to continue learning from me I have
three links in the show notes down below
you can check out my email list where I
send a newsletter once a week explain
different things about becoming data
analyst you can check out my free
webinar that I do where I teach you how
to land your first day of job in 90 days
kind of give you the SBN method the
backbone that really helps my students
land jobs and then of course we have the
data analytics accelerator which is the
best program to become a data analyst
you can check out all three of those
links in the show notes down below hope
you guys enjoyed this episode I'll see
you on the next one

Title: Skills, Networking, Portfolio: How Brad Yarbro Landed a Data Job

Description: In today's episode, I had the privilege of interviewing the incredible Brad Yarbro, a senior data scientist at Protective Life. üéôÔ∏è

His journey from an economics student to a data professional is beyond inspiring.

Listen and get inspired to kickstart your own data career! üìäüíº

Connect with Brad Yarbro: https://www.linkedin.com/in/brad-yarbro/


Timestamps:
04:59 - üåü Gain Work Experience: Opportunities for Students!
11:59 - üíº From Analyst to Supply Chain Guru: A Journey
15:18 - üìä Data Pros Unite: Meet the Data and Business Teams
20:47 - üì∏ Quality Analysis with Cutting-Edge Tech in Defense
27:53 - üí° Data Career Advice: Networking Leads to Success


Video Transcript:
hello aspiring data analyst we have a
great episode for you coming up where we
talk to Brad Yarbrough who basically
went from an economic student in college
to a data analyst kind of to a senior
data scientist we talk about everything
on his journey that helped him get there
from going through a masters was it
worth it or not how much did it cost
what was the time investment how did he
use his Network to actually land that
job and what role did a portfolio play
in this whole process if you're trying
to land your First Data job you'll
definitely want to check out this
episode and see what principles that you
can steal from Brad's journey and apply
to your own let's get into it welcome to
the data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job here's your host
Avery Smith
welcome back to the data career podcast
my guest today is Brad Yarbrough who's
going to talk about his transition from
a non-traditional background in kind of
Economics to a data analytics and then
data science we're all Brad today is a
senior data scientist at protective life
Brad welcome to the podcast yeah thanks
for having me glad to be on okay so you
studied economics in college tell us
about how you got your first data job
sure yeah studied economics with a
double major in mathematics and I was
hosted in the business school and a
friend introduced me to the idea of data
analytics and data science in undergrad
and decided to pursue that and I really
didn't have the experience coming out of
undergrad that I should have had to
really land a data science role that was
back in 2017 so ended up going straight
into a masters in applied statistics and
from there built the necessary sections
to land a couple offers and take my
first data analytics job okay awesome
let's talk about some of those steps
that that you took because like you said
you were studying economics mathematics
inside the business school right that's
correct okay cool and what was your
first data job you were able to land I
really had no work experience up until
when I started grad school I took
classes the first semester and then over
the summer I was getting married and I
was staying in town so I didn't take any
internships based on any cool companies
headquarters but through the connection
of a professor recommended I talked to
the head of a research institute on
campus and he ran a data analytics lab
and I knocked on his door and I asked
him told him my experience I was you
know econ and math background working in
statistics interested in data analysis
and data science and asked if he had any
work that I could work on over the
summer and he said they could probably
find something for me to do do and he
asked if I was willing to work for free
initially he said he'd try to pay me if
he could but I said yes I would work for
free obviously part-time so I could get
another part-time job that paid to make
ends meet but ultimately ended up
Landing kind of an internship in data
analytics research that summer and ended
up paying 15 an hour which is enough to
kind of get by for now but that
internship actually turned into The
Graduate research assistantship that I
took to pay for the rest of my master's
program so that was really my first paid
role was that summer internship okay
there's so many awesome things there I
want to dive into the first one is if
you're a college student listening this
is a really good opportunity to try to
emulate try to recreate in your career
when you're a college student there is a
lot more opportunities going on you just
have to kind of go out and find it so
you know this is when you were a
master's student correct yeah that's
correct I completed my first semester of
my grad school so it was a 30 hour
program so about average of 10 hours of
courses per semester and I was going
into the summer and was looking for some
work to do okay cool so for all our
master's students listening this is an
opportunity for you and for all of our
undergraduates this is an opportunity
for you as well I started kind of
similarly to Brad but back in my
freshman year of college back when I was
a freshman I was really excited about
you know just starting real life and
being in college and I was studying
chemical engineering at the time and I
had no experience with chemical
engineering at all and I was like you
know what if I'm going to do this for
the rest of my life I want to figure out
if I even like it I want to start doing
it and so I actually cold messaged 20
professors and said hey can I come work
in your lab I didn't have any of that
work experience either and one ended up
two ended up replying and one ended up
giving me a chance to work there after
getting trained for three months for
free so I had to be willing to work for
free in that case there so there's lots
of good opportunities when you don't
have that experience to try to connect
with one of these you know professors or
college research institutes and there's
usually good opportunities there so I
love that you you did that I think all
of our masters and undergrad students
listening to this can probably really
benefit from that story the other thing
I really like that you did is you had to
go and like talk to the professor face
to face right like you had to put some
effort into it it wasn't just like it
was given to you right can you talk
about a little bit more yeah sure so the
professor or one of the professors and
admissions Professor who helped me get
into the program she I was just getting
her just general things I need to know
and she told me I should go talk to this
particular Professor so went to his door
just randomly caught him in his office
and sat down and told him what I was
interested in and what I was trying to
do and just asked if there's anything I
could work on so it was totally
unplanned unscripted just had to be
willing to work and show eagerness to
learn and that really you know got my
foot in the door I I love that you said
the eagerness to learn which a lot of
people you know when you're eager to
learn
a lot of times you don't that means you
don't have the skills necessarily right
and you think oh man no one's ever going
to hire me you know but actually in the
last episode that just came out with
Megan McGuire we talked to a hiring
manager that's one of the things that
she said that she looks for is the
eagerness to learn because in data we
both know right that you never can learn
at all so being eager to continue to
learn as time goes on and to improve I
think it's really important to to your
career as a data professional so I like
that you said the eagerness to learn
kind of got you in the door okay so you
go and talk to this person you you
convince them hey I'd work for free even
you know they end up paying you 15 an
hour and that eventually led to not so
much of an internship more of a more
formal role while you were in grad
school and then what happened after you
graduated yeah so prior to graduation I
was able to make connections through the
research institute and just with the
skills I built there working in SQL and
Tableau and R and a little bit of python
was able to land the three job offers
and ended up accepting one and that's
what I went into straight after
graduation so two offers with different
banks and one offer with a defense
contractor so titles were varying from
senior marketing data just a generic
financial analyst and then the offer I
ended up accepting was actually supplier
quality engineer for the defense
contractor company so ended up working
there and even though the title was
supplier quality engineer doing a lot of
data analytics work on that job mostly
working in Python SQL Tableau and Excel
so that was my next step after
graduation was going straight into that
role yeah and that was supplier quality
engineering that you would never really
guess that role has that much to do with
data analytics but it did huh yeah I
think a lot of roles out there and teams
have data that they're looking to make
sense of and really utilize and this
team acknowledged that and kind of
sought me out in the interview process
as far as what skills I could offer to
kind of help them parse through the data
that they had and you know overall
increased productivity as a team so I
was kind of the only one on the team
doing the particular data analytics work
but it was definitely a lot of
opportunity for data analytics in that
role yeah I agree there is there's a lot
of roles that aren't necessarily titled
as data roles but really would function
as data roles when I were worked at
Exxon my official title was optimization
engineer which doesn't have the word
data in it doesn't have the word
analytics in it but I spent all day you
know analyzing data making statistical
models doing machine learning
programming doing stats it was very data
Centric but you would never really guess
from that title so I think it's
important to know that sometimes titles
are can be a little misleading out of
curiosity why did you take the supplier
quality engineering role over the senior
marketing analyst role that sounds more
data in sounds more senior the role of
the defense contractor was also it was
in Texas I'm from Alabama so Texas was a
little bit more climate similar than the
other offer was from Ohio and then the
third offer was actually from Alabama as
well so I wanted a change of scenery but
maybe not too much so I thought the
career advancement opportunities would
be there with the company so I ended up
in with the defense contractor okay I
like that life's not all about your
salary and money so it's always good to
take a holistic approach when looking at
job offers and stuff like that why do
you think you got those three job offers
or how did you end up like in those
situations to get those offers yeah I
definitely had built a little bit of
chops as far as interview goes I was
able to answer the questions that they
wanted answered and some of them were
you know less really rigorously
Technical and more just what's your
approach to putting but I think through
the connections that I made in the
program in grad school and the research
connections that I made with professors
and they had previously hired students
from this program before so they knew
the skill level of students coming out
of the program kind of what could be
expected there so as long as I didn't
really totally drop the ball in the
interviews I think it was reasonable
that they would give me a chance okay
cool very nice so you're in this role
you're doing all this data work it's not
necessarily called that it's not you
know it's not necessarily it says the
word data or analytics but you
eventually move into a senior data
scientist role at this company how did
you make that transition from supplier
quality engineering to senior data
scientists yeah sure so the jump I made
at the first company was from kind of
senior date or data analyst or working
in supper quality engineering to senior
data analysts at the same company and
the whole time I was there I was open
and honest with my manager about my
career goals as far as five and ten year
plan definitely wanted to be more impure
data science and analytics so he knew
that our team wasn't purely focused on
that we were just utilizing my skills to
help the team overall so after one year
in that role when it's kind of
reasonable to transition within company
he encouraged me to seek other
opportunities within the company and
then through sending out a few
applications and meeting with a couple
of different managers on other teams and
ended up Landing in Supply Chain
management and working as a senior data
analyst on a dedicated team that they
had a role carved out that was you know
purely searching for that rather than
integrating or embedding with a team
working on other things okay so being
honest with your boss like being up
front and talking about what your career
plans long term was really key for that
and then it also sounds like networking
with other managers and other you know
people at your company was probably
pretty big in that transition as well
absolutely People You Meet along the way
that you work on projects with that are
on other teams it's good to stay in
touch and see what they're exposed to as
far as other teams and opportunities and
actually from the grad school program I
came from two of my friends ended up at
the same company as well so had exposure
to the projects they were working on was
able to discuss with them and what
potential opportunities there were so
yeah networking through school and
through careers definitely helped out a
lot okay and at this defense contractor
I know you won't be able to say exactly
what you were working on but in Broad
terms what were some of the projects
that that you were working on what were
some of the problems that you were
trying to solve and what type of tools
were you using to solve those problems
yeah sure our main problem that we were
solving was just uh quality defects
coming through the manufacturing line at
various points in manufacturing and if
they were determined to be caused by the
supplier was what my teams had to deal
with but spanning across all quality
Engineers they would take several hours
of their day in meetings just reviewing
the raw images from these initial
defects and they really would forward
those to another team based on who they
thought should work that problem so the
project I worked on was integrating a
machine learning model using you know
unstructured structured and image data
to predict what the cause of the defect
was so we could bypass these multiple
hours of human review and just forward
that to the team that should work on it
who was the suspected cause of the
defect so that was really kind of
automating a very manual process before
so that was the main project that I
worked on and ultimately analyzing and
trying to sort these defects as to which
ones were high impact that we should
work first versus which ones were lower
impact we could wait until we had the
opportunity to work on those and was
that in the supplier quality engineering
role yeah that was actually in the
supplier quality engineer role so there
was another data analytics data science
team collaborating on this project but
since I expressed my boss that I wanted
to be more involved in that field he let
me take a key role on that project
providing feedback to the team building
the machine learning model and providing
the feedback to iterate on that
development okay cool I was gonna say
that sounds like a pretty Advanced
project you were more like the domain
expert or the subject matter expert the
SME who was working with the data team
to make sure that the data team whoever
was writing you know those machine
learning algorithms were meeting the
business needs that you are more
familiar with than this machine learning
engineer or something like that yeah
that's right and I was able to really
bridge the gap because I could talk
about the machine learning and data
analyst Concepts but also the you know
quality engineering concept so it was
good to be in that role I think this is
something that a lot of people don't
necessarily value or understand that in
big organizations there's almost two
types of data professionals there's like
a data professional that's on a data
team and then there's a data
professional that's on a business team
and they both are really cool roles and
they're both valuable but you might like
one more than the other so in this case
you know Brad was embedded in more of a
business team doing data things but
really Bridging the Gap between the data
and the business versus you can
sometimes have more pure you know data
professionals that are not as bridged as
well to the business so I I think it's a
really good point to bring in because
it's not something I knew when I went
into industry it was kind of the same
way at accent mobile where we had these
like business data people and then we
had these data people both roles are
awesome they're a little bit different
but they can be really valuable and you
might gravitate towards one more than
the other based off of your personality
and skill set and experience okay very
cool let's talk about tech stack a
little bit if you can and this can maybe
be in any of the roles you've had in the
past what tools have you used the most
yeah sure it's kind of a short list so
starting in grad school earned SQL and R
and Tableau and python as well thought
that was important to learn but it was
easier to do the statistics homework and
R so definitely lean towards more heavy
use of R and then as far as career goes
once I landed kind of full-time working
jobs definitely started using python
more SQL and Tableau were still relevant
and then ended up switching from senior
data analysts to senior data scientists
and definitely use more SQL and python
at this point and then our current
Enterprise tool is power bi so
definitely had to make the switch
between Tableau and power bi so those
skills are transferable and I would say
the skills from R to python are
transferable but the biggest thing
really starting out is you know pick one
tool to learn yeah that's typically my
advice as well is if you know power bi
you can learn Tableau and vice versa and
I think the the gap between R and python
is a little bit bigger but I think this
the principle still applies that you
know really just focus on learning one
of them because once you learn one of
one of them you'll be able to figure out
the other I'm curious to know what your
thoughts are on the python R debate in
battle what which one do you like more
which one do you feel like is this
Superior yeah I mean I think I like
python more and think it's superior but
I think R is just so unique that if
roles allow you to use R you can really
stand out as a candidate with particular
our experience so you really can't go
wrong with learning either and there's
definitely pros and cons to each
language but the biggest mistake I like
I found for early on was trying to learn
a bit of both R and Python and I became
kind of intermediate in both languages
where if I would have just pushed one
aside and said I'll learn that later I
could have become more advanced and
probably you know add more value in my
roles just learning that one tool better
rather than trying to learn them both so
I think that's just a takeaway I would
have yeah I agree I think focusing on
one is probably let it go we teach
python first inside of the data
analytics accelerator because I think
it's just more in demand than are but I
do respect the amount that you can get
done in very few line kinds of code in R
like it's R is almost easier but just
kind of doesn't go as far down the road
what about power bi and Tableau I
preferred Tableau which currently my
company's working with power bi so I'm a
bit bitter about that but yeah
definitely coming up speed they have
very similar capabilities but so far
just as my you know about five years of
experience in Tableau preferred that do
you feel like that Tableau is just more
aesthetic or do you feel like it's
actually easier to use I think both it's
more intuitive from
what you're trying to get to and then
easier to use uh Power bi relies more on
the data model from what I've learned
and Tableau has a little bit of
flexibility as far as joint data
together and their kind of data
relationships can be a little changeable
so I was able to get to prettier looking
you know final dashboards and Tableau
quicker than I've been able to empower
bi so far but definitely still learning
there but my initial take is a preferred
Tableau okay I could see that I I kind
of agree I I like the power bi layout a
little bit more sometimes just I like
that it's like you choose what graph
you're making and then you click on the
you know whatever fields or columns you
want to put and you put them into the
right position versus in Tableau it's
like a lot of times I'm just like kind
of dragging stuff on kind of randomly
until it looks like how I want to so I
do kind of like the structure of power
bi but if I only choose one I probably
would lean tap low it's also more in
demand just slightly than power bi so
that's why we do two modules of Tableau
in the data analytics accelerator just
because it's a little bit more in demand
a little bit easier to get started plus
keep in mind that when you're at home a
lot of people are using Macs and power
bi is not fun to get on a Mac template
public is a cool spot for kind of
working on a portfolio project so I
don't know if power Pi has something
similar but tablet public is definitely
worth checking out yeah that's true
Better Community in Tableau as well so
you kind of mentioned what you were
doing at this defense contractor
basically you guys were getting supplies
from other companies these companies
we'd want to make sure that these raw
materials or supplies we're up to Snuff
that they were high quality they didn't
have defects did anything wrong with
them so y'all were taking pictures of
them and then analyzing the pictures
which is kind of interesting because
people kind of don't realize this but
really pictures are just at the end of
the day numbers it's just you have a
bunch of different pixels those pixels
are represented by an RGB value a red
blue green value right and those values
are represented by a number of what 0 to
99 or something like that I don't
remember exactly but those really just a
pixel is just a number so we can
actually do data analysis on pictures
because pictures are just numbers which
is fascinating so that's what y'all were
working on there now at your current
company what in big terms of you know
business problems what type of business
problems are you working on yeah I work
at a life insurance located in
Birmingham Alabama and work on
underwriting related projects so
essentially my major project is when you
apply for life insurance we try to
predict how healthy you are and if you
pass the prediction then we'll route you
towards accelerated underwriting which
if you've applied for life insurance
typically a very extensive process you
have to do you know lab work and gearing
analysis and really with this new
technology we developed that if you're
predicted healthy enough we will make
you an offer on the spot and you don't
have to go through the medical exam so
it saves time and saves you from the
invasive process but so I primarily work
on that predictive model that predicts
who we should you know do full
underwriting process and get the medical
exam versus who can bypass that and be
accelerated through the process so we
you know use a lot of different data
products to make that prediction so it's
definitely I guess big data is not
really
a big topic anymore but we have a vast
amount of data we can use to make that
prediction and definitely helps with the
whole business goal gotcha cool so
you're basically taking in factors
things like you know age where you live
maybe how much you exercise maybe your
existing weight and you're able to
predict like almost like a health score
for someone and decide on you know
how much we should insure this person
for underlying goal would be to predict
mortality but we don't really have that
number exactly because we don't have the
whole United States population of their
customer base but we're able to make
predictions based on historical
Underwriters evaluations so we're
predicting on you know previous rules
and human input trying to get a machine
to learn those patterns Okay cool so you
basically predict when people are going
to die we'd like to be able to man
that's kind of grim using data to
predict death I like that yeah it can be
Grim but I think the opportunities when
you seek life insurance is kind of big
positive events as far as buying a house
or having a child so there's yeah you
definitely have to keep in mind though
what your data represents because when
we look at claims data that is you know
the death of a person loss of a life
loss of a loved one so when you're
looking at the spreadsheets or you know
the sales in your jeeper notebook
definitely zoom out and think of what
the data means and what impact that has
on people's lives for sure very
interesting okay one other thing I want
to talk about is what role has a
portfolio played in your data career
Journey
yeah I've definitely been able to talk
about and work on various projects along
the way inside of school and inside of
work and outside of work and initially
the portfolio that I developed helped me
land my first role in data I was
actually working on some Tableau based
projects with my graduate research and I
thought to kind of screenshot some
sanitized versions taking out the
sensitive data but screenshot those and
store them on my iPad in a portfolio and
have them at the ready for interviews
when I was interviewing for one of the
roles that I was trying to get coming
out of grad school I brought the iPad
with me into the interview and
interviewers asked you know what I had
worked on worked on as far as data
analytics projects and I was able to
pull that out and show them
specific deliverables that I had and the
way the dashboards could interact and
interpret the data
so that was really the starting point of
seeing the value of having worked on
projects and being able to show them to
hiring managers and interviewers very
cool that's awesome it's the grad you to
have it on the iPad and use it in the
in-person interviews that's very cool
method it's like here's the tangible
evidence I have it right here you know
it's almost you can touch it that's how
tangible it is that's great okay great
the other thing I want to talk to you
about was what was your master's degree
so you have a master's in let's see in
statistics yeah Masters in applied
statistics and the program is a little
bit more theoretical than applied but it
was called applied statistics and
definitely walked away with good skills
what was your favorite part about it and
what do you wish that it had a little
bit yeah my favorite part maybe I think
the rigorous kind of technical
mathematical aspects was my favorite
gave me really good understanding and
problem solving of you know the
foundations to these machine learning so
that's my favorite part what was your
other question what do you wish you had
back in 2017 when I started the program
it was mostly the courses were SAS based
so I wish there would have been more
coverage of arathon back then I think
you know more and more now in 2023 are
in python or you know having a seat at
the table as far as courses covering
them but back then or in Python wasn't
as heavily emphasized I had one elective
course in R and all of the Python that I
learned was self-learned during my
graduate school okay interesting and
then what was the the cost and the time
investment yeah the time investment it's
really hard to estimate but the cost was
uh 30 hours of courses which
corresponded to about sixteen thousand
dollars of tuition for in-state students
and it was about three times that amount
for out-of-state students so you could
say forty eight thousand dollars and
that spanned about three semesters of
work so 30 hours in the program so
really the program though was kind of
full time like I had time outside of
class to work on graduate research but
beyond that there wasn't there wasn't
really much opportunity for side jobs
just due to the homework and amount of
study involved so it's definitely a
significant time investment and as far
as public state school I think the
tuition was relatively affordable but
for out-of-state students that that's
definitely a high number yeah okay great
so you're looking at a year and a half
full time around between 16 and 45 000
depending on in-state versus not in
state tuition okay that's great well
perfect so that was one of of the
springboards your network was one of
your springboards you know being brave
and asking knocking on doors and asking
for opportunities seeking them out not
waiting for opportunities to come to you
all kind of LED you to where you're at
today which is senior data scientist
role at this life insurance company I
think that's an absolutely incredible
story I think there's a lot that people
can take away from this kind of getting
that stepping stone job you know working
a role that wasn't didn't have the word
data didn't have the word analytics in
there but really you know involved data
analytics I think that you shared a lot
of very useful things for our audience
today Brad and I'm grateful any other
last words you'd want to to give someone
who's trying to kind of do what you've
done in the past
yeah nothing in particular I mean
there's various ways to get to where you
want to go I think you just have to be
determined and willing to learn and
really carve out the time to learn and
you know work on projects and I know
following Avery's content has been
helpful to me yeah there's a lot of
different paths to get to where you want
to go don't really limit yourself or
think that you can't do something based
on what you've seen others do so just
work on projects and continue learning
awesome thank you so much Brad yeah
thanks for having me so that is this
week's episode great having Brad on the
podcast I hope that you can take some of
the things that Brad talked about you
know knocking on doors using the
portfolio and really nailing the
interview can help you in your data
career Journey if you guys want some
extra help in your data career journey I
have some resources for you below in the
show notes I'm starting up my newsletter
again which I'm really excited about
which is going to be one actionable
weekly thing that you can do to improve
your data career in your inbox once a
week check it out in the show notes down
below and of course I also have my one
of my webinars coming up as well you
guys can sign up for that for free I'm
basically going to sit down for you for
45 minutes and teach you my thoughts on
how to actually land your first day to
job I hope to see you guys there live in
one of those webinars

Title: Difference between Data Science and Data Analytics

Description: In this episode of Data Career Podcast, I explore Data Analytics vs Data Science, highlighting key differences and stress the fluidity between data science and analytics. 

Don't miss it!


Timestamps:
00:56 - Predictive Analytics: Foreseeing the Future üîÆüìà
01:43 - Diagnostic Analytics: Unraveling "Why" üïµÔ∏è‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏èüîç
02:10 - Analytics in Book Sales üìöüìä
03:09 - Data Scientists: Masters of Prediction üß†üéØ
03:56 - Decoding Data Analytics vs. Data Science üóùÔ∏èüíª
05:26 - Gateway to Success: Landing a Data Job üö™üíº


Video Transcript:
okay so what's the difference between
data science and data analytics the
answer is not much but there are some
key differences that we're going to
cover in this video one thing I need to
emphasize right off the bat is I'm not
talking about the difference between a
data analyst and a data scientist
unfortunately there's not a black and
white line saying data analysts only do
data analytics and data scientists only
do data science it's a lot more fuzzy
than that you can sort of think of it
like that if you want but it's a big
oversimplification just remember that
titles are dumb in the data world at the
end of the day both data analytics and
data science can be trimmed down to this
using data to make better decisions and
a lot of the times people are going to
say data analytics and they really mean
data science or they're going to see
data science and they really mean data
analytics there is one big difference
though and that is that often data
analytics focused on what happened in
the past while data science also
includes what will happen in the future
so for example looking at what cereal
sold best in the store last month that
would be data analytics predicting what
cereals might sell better in the future
that's data science in a fancier more
correct way to say all this is I'm
really talking about the difference
between descriptive analytics and
Predictive Analytics and those names are
helpful here so let's get into it
descriptive analytics is what happened
it statistically looks at historical
data sets and gives us numerical
understanding of what happened
Predictive Analytics well it predicts
stuff it uses data to create a model to
predict what might happen in the future
but then we also have Diagnostic and
prescriptive analytics as well and those
aren't nearly as straightforward
diagnostic analytics basically takes
things a little bit further from
descriptive analytics it tries to ask
why did this happen this means you're
looking for explainability here what
happened happened and then prescriptive
analytics is about once we have the
prediction what can we do with that
prediction how can we create a favorable
outcome with the model we've created
what steps can we take I know this can
be pretty confusing so let's talk about
a more concrete example let's say we
work for a book company descriptive
analytics would basically tell us that
you know there's 127 copies of this book
that sold in January and 189 that sold
in February that's what happened in the
past it's in the past nothing in the
future diagnostic analytics would tell
us maybe why we sold more books in
February than we did in January and
maybe that's because we did a big
Valentine's Day sale or we had more
website traffic that month some sort of
reason for what happened
some sort of explainability here
Predictive Analytics on the other end
would predict how many books were likely
to sell next month or six months from
now and then finally prescriptive
analytics would give us recommended
action steps that we can take to
maximize Book Sales based off the models
and data analysis we've done does that
make sense so let's dive back into what
a data analyst would do in this book
scenario a data analyst would surely be
ready to handle the descriptive
analytics this might take form in some
sort of a pivot table in Excel or a line
chart in Tableau there's actually lots
of different ways you could do this and
a data analyst could also do the
diagnostic analytics as well maybe that
includes creating a scatter plot between
web traffic and book copy sales and
power bi or maybe it's a heat map table
made in Excel or something like that now
what a data analyst create the model to
predict the number of books we'd sell in
the future this is where things get a
little bit interesting the answer is
maybe not lots of analysts never touch
any sort of predictive modeling in their
careers at all but a lot do as well so
it's really hard to say and a lot of the
times this is where the task would be
handed off to a data scientist data
scientists their jobs is to make models
this is what they're best at so you
could do something as simple as linear
regression in Excel or you could do more
of a Time forecasting model like arima
in r or something way complicated like a
neural net in Python the majority of the
time these tasks are going to be better
handled by a data scientist it's what
they do they create the models and then
finally with prescriptive analytics it's
a gray area again but most the time a
data scientist is probably going to do a
little bit better job a little bit more
well-equipped to handle it but a data
analyst could take a stab at it as well
so back to the original question what's
the difference between data analytics
and data science not much basically
predictive modeling that's it now if you
go Google this question you're going to
get all these crazy Long blog articles
from all these different universities
trying to get you in their master's
program and has all this technical
jargon and they say all this stuff it's
going to try to scare you but don't let
it scare you the cool thing is the
difference between data science and data
analytics it's pretty fluid and if you
start in data analytics you can always
add data science later on it's not a big
deal in fact it's kind of a natural
progression so don't stress about it
just get inside the data world one way
or another getting your foot in the data
door getting any sort of data job is the
right step in this case and then you can
always adjust from there because after
all you're always going to know the most
once you're actually on the job so
that's it hopefully you understand the
difference between data science and data
analytics and if you enjoyed this video
I think you'll enjoy this one next

Title: Hiring Manager‚Äôs Secrets to Getting The Job as a Data Analyst w/ Megan McGuire

Description: üïµÔ∏è‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏è Curious about the mysterious hiring process of a data career?
Find out how Megan McGuire narrows down candidates and assesses skills in the podcast.
Get insider knowledge on code assessments, interviews, and what it takes to land the dream data role! üí™üìà



Timestamps:
02:14 - The Value of Junior Analysts
12:12 - Curiosity and Problem Solving in Data Analytics
21:46 - Be the perfect candidate for specific company rather than a pretty good candidate
24:15 - How drive, experience and upskilling set up interviewee success
28:59 - Show off your skills with your Tableau Public or GitHub Profile
36:53 - Rejections aren't necessarily your fault


Video Transcript:
job application process sucks it's hard
you get ghosted all the time you get
rejected it's not fun at all in this
episode we're peeling back the curtain
and giving you guys an exclusive sneak
peek into what it's like to be a hiring
data manager my guest today is Megan
McGuire she is a senior data manager who
just went through the hiring process not
too long ago she's going to open up the
door and let us see through her whole
process how many applications did she
get how long was the job listing up for
what's made candidates stand out over
other candidates who did they end up
hiring and why it's all covered in
today's episode so I'm really excited
let's get into it welcome to the data
career podcast the podcast that helps
aspiring data professionals land their
next data job here's your host Avery
Smith
all right hello everyone and welcome
back to the data career podcast I'm
joined today by Megan McGuire who is a
senior data analytics manager at general
assembly and is gracious enough to kind
of walk through a day in a life as a
data analytics manager specifically
through the hiring process so when you
actually go in and submit an application
what happens from there Megan's here to
tell us all about it so thanks for
joining us today Megan hi I'm happy to
be here okay awesome so you are the
scary imagined hiring manager but you
don't look so scary you look pretty nice
so it's fun to actually see the human
behind kind of this mythical idea here
and you recently just hired someone
right you hired your fifth person onto
your team yes I hired
okay and that brought up your team to
around five people and you guys
basically do all sorts of different
analytics projects in sales marketing
customer learning those types of things
regulatory reporting it really runs the
gamut anything we need to make smarter
decisions as a business my team helps
support I love that because that's data
analytics at the end of the day is how
can we make Better Business decisions
that are more factual based off of data
how do you guys know that you needed to
even hire someone new like what kind of
brought that up yeah so I mean we
actually came at it and we knew pretty
quickly we wanted somebody at the junior
level part of what we were struggling
with is I have a team that's mostly
senior analysts lots of experience eight
to ten plus years of experience lots of
knowledge lots of specialized knowledge
and we had a lot of in-depth reporting
requests and data questions we wanted to
address like rebuilding our forecasting
process but we wanted to bring somebody
in at the junior level to obviously
learn from that but also be able to
support some of the lighter stuff so
being able to support some of our more
operational analytics so things like how
many students did we have in Texas last
year to be able to support a regulatory
request it's the sort of thing that at
the senior level like Breeze through it
really quickly but we still have other
ways that we need to use their time so
we were able to see that we had this
sort of Gap in coverage that would be
really well addressed by somebody at the
junior level and our business is a lot
about upskilling helping people find new
careers so it's really exciting when we
see an opportunity to help somebody
learn and move into this new space yeah
that's awesome so I feel like sometimes
people are afraid that there is never
going to be any entry-level positions
but you guys obviously created this
entry level position and it sounds like
it was mostly to kind of offload some of
the work that some of the senior
analysts were already doing so I think
good to know that there's entry-level
jobs that are available and then also I
imagine that the senior analysts would
be available to kind of help this new
person get their feet into the projects
and stuff like that oh absolutely
they've been a fantastic group all
around so the senior analysts have
already been very collaborative with
each other for all of those years of
experience you're still going to learn
different things about data analytics
different areas business different
techniques so they were already very
collaborative with each other sharing
all of that knowledge and then by
folding a junior analyst into the role
they had so many other things that they
could teach and then they were all
learning from each other as well so we
have one analyst who's an expert in
marketing and with her helping upskill
our Junior analyst in that area so that
she could learn more about marketing
reporting everybody else kind of joined
in on that too so it just created a
larger circle of collaboration and yeah
having a junior analyst there she
obviously asks more questions which is
great to have on the team because a lot
of the times we didn't have answers so
those presents like those questions and
that presence was really helpful for us
it helped us refine why don't we know
the answer to that is that something we
need to get on our roadmap so that we
can clarify it do we need to add
documentation so she had a lot of
support from the other analysts in the
group a lot of new things to learn but
also brought a lot to that crew as well
okay awesome so you guys kind of decide
you as a manager and your senior analyst
decide okay we want to get a junior
analyst into this team so that we can
offload some of the stuff that we're
doing so we can maybe focus on a little
bit harder things or something like that
so you go and talk to HR and do you
create the job description or do you
create that as a team or does HR create
that that comes from
actually created our entire bi career
ladder it's the hiring manager so I have
even for levels that we've never filled
or that we haven't filled in the last
couple of years I have a career ladder
spelling out our overall competency
rubric so these are the general skills
you should have in any bi analyst role
and then with some additional detail on
responsibilities the leveling I accepted
each of them so like I expect really
high Proficiency in SQL from a senior
analyst I expect some knowledge of SQL
in a junior analyst okay very cool
that's good to know that someone who
knows about data wrote this one I know
it'll differ from company to company but
sometimes I look at some of these job
requirements and I haven't written too
many myself so I can't like say how easy
are how hard it is but sometimes they're
like I think I saw I don't know if this
was even true I saw this like meme of
someone asking for like five plus years
experience and it was like okay that
hasn't been out for five years I've seen
that with like DBT too where somebody's
like we want 10 years of experience with
DBT well good luck it didn't exist yet
yeah I see that I've also seen the other
end I once saw a job description that
asked for five years of Microsoft Access
experience which if you've ever worked
in Microsoft Access if you need to be
that good at Microsoft Access something
has gone terribly wrong yeah that that's
actually interesting I want to talk on
that a little tangent here but I work
with a lot of students who don't have
five plus years of experience in
anything technical or in analytics and
sometimes they're afraid to apply to
jobs with the years of experience now I
know having years of experience is
important but I like to try to give this
analogy sometimes where let's say you
have five plus years of access
experience like once a year you pulled
access if you guys don't know what
Microsoft Access is it's basically you
can think of it as an old version of
Microsoft version of SQL basically but
way worse like let's say like you pulled
that out of the attic and you used it
once every year for five years
versus so you have five years of
experience of access versus me let's say
I spent every waking second of 2023
studying access like so I only have half
a year of experience how do you like as
a hiring manager kind of rank those
against each other well that's a great
question honestly it's really hard to
parse that out on somebody's resume I
mean when you're writing your resume I
know you've already given this advice
you need to be hitting these keywords so
you're going to include in there that
you've used Tableau you might have
honestly only used Tableau for one
project for me as a hiring manager my
goal isn't necessarily to rank them
against each other because my goal is
not to hire the person with most years
of experience necessarily it's to hire
the person who can best understand the
role and understand what we need and
understand the tools that we use to do
so
um so either of those people could have
a really good knowledge of access most
likely the person who studied it more
and more recently is going to have
better knowledge of access and its
features but to parse that out I'm going
to be asking a lot of questions about I
really hope I'm not asking about
Microsoft Access but I'm going to ask
ask me a lot of questions about the tool
itself and the projects that you've done
and how much you've used it to get a
better sense of what that means so yeah
that five years honestly might not
actually mean anything it could still be
helpful if you're writing your resume
and you're thinking about all of your
say Excel experience that you've used
once a year for something should
probably still include that like don't
sell yourself short on that knowledge
and then hopefully the hiring manager
that you're working with is thinking
about it a bit more holistically you
want to think about it from that
function perspective your ability rather
than just the number on the resume yeah
I love that so you guys listening please
don't sell yourself short if you only
have a little bit of experience you
never know and also one thing I like to
tell people this makes your job harder
Megan so I apologize but like like she
said it's really hard to tell how good
you are at a technical tool from your
resume and so we'll get to this later in
in the pipeline process I'm sure but you
guys don't be the first person to reject
you because you're like oh I'm not good
enough at SQL to apply to this job let
them tell you that don't be the rejecter
you let Megan be the mean person don't
be the mean person to yourself yes yeah
make it a little harder on me and again
it's a it's an entry-level role you
don't need to be an expert in SQL
ideally I have rejected resumes where
somebody was looking for a more advanced
role when we got into the hiring process
it looked like oh you're actually
looking for a senior while we're hiring
a junior role right now we can't align
on those expectations like a junior role
I'm not looking for the ringer who comes
in with 10 years of experience that's
almost never going to be the right fit
for that person but you don't have to
come in with all of the prior knowledge
like come in show me what you've learned
and we'll be able to figure out what's
going to be the right fit awesome okay
so you write this job description you
hand it over HR they they post it
somewhere on the internet somewhere and
applications start to come in so can you
walk us through how many applications
how long you maybe you guys had the job
open and how many applications you got
yeah I think we had this role listed for
like a week we didn't give it long
because we got 285 applications within a
week honestly when I looked at them and
I looked at every single one of them
like looked at every resume probably
about 70 of that applicant pool could
have been successful in the role again
it's an entry-level role a lot of this
is about what you're able to learn and
like what you've shown some promise in
so far so yeah most of these people
honestly could have done pretty well in
the role so that makes it really hard to
narrow down honestly when I hire a
senior analyst that's a lot easier
because I can go through and see that
like you don't have the body of
experience to support that you've done
this for a long time you don't have the
portfolio you don't have the projects
but I'm looking at a junior analyst I
assume you're not going to have those
things so I have to parse out on a lot
more stringent criteria so if you don't
have experience in the tech stack that
I'm looking for 285 applicants it's only
half of those have experience with
Tableau which is what we use as our
visualization tool I'm going to talk to
the half with Tableau before I talk to
the other half with power bi or looker
we have to prioritize on these things
just because there's a lot of people
coming through so out of that 285 I
think we had 12 talk to our recruiter
that's our next stage is we do a
recruiter screen I'm a big believer in
the hiring process like I'm not going to
ask you to do a technical screen before
we put some time forward to you we need
to have that sort of give and take so
you talk to our recruiter at that stage
after that we had five candidates exit
because they either didn't respond or
location or salary requirement is going
to line up so then we had seven
candidates take our code assessment we
do a SQL test on code signal to review
candidate skills I really enjoy having
something like technically grounded
where I'm able to see the code you can
write it doesn't really work well to do
like a quick Tableau assessment but
sql's such a core skill and it's really
easy to test with a lot of SQL questions
we're doing some grouping I think there
might be a window function question on
there so at that stage actually
everybody passed our SQL interview but
we did have one candidate accept a
different offer at that stage and exit
the our average completion time on that
stage was 24 minutes my goal is also to
keep that stage pretty short I don't
want to ask you for like a six hour test
yeah you're applying for lots of jobs
especially at the entry level I'm not
trying to keep you for many many hours
the stage after that we moved to was my
hiring manager interview and in that
stage I'm asking usually some more
problem-solving questions so I'm going
to ask you about something in your
portfolio something that you've gone
deep on and ask you things like how
would you expand that project what else
are you curious about this project that
you might have worked on in your
portfolio if you were rebuilding it like
what would you do differently this time
what other data would be helpful for
driving decisions
those sorts of questions to dive deep
again like I'm not asking you about all
of your experience in data analytics I
assume that you don't have that applying
for an entry-level role I like how the
questions you're asking like how would
you expand this or what are some things
you didn't get to because a lot of the
times I have students who will work on a
project for like six months and they
feel so embarrassed to publish it
because they're like it's not done it
could be better but I think we kind of
know that no data project ever is
perfect oh they're never done yeah and I
love that you're like hey actually not
finishing the project is a good
interview problem to talk about because
you're like what would you do if you had
more time with this and I think that's a
really cool question yeah like tell me
more about what you want to dig into
also when you're coming at a data
project author you've got some curiosity
you've started moving into data
analytics you're somebody who wants to
ask some questions hopefully your
portfolio projects that you're working
on are things that you're interested in
you want to learn more about so you're
like going after data that may not have
been analyzed elsewhere so yeah I want
to hear about that Curiosity I want to
hear what problems you're trying to
solve I've seen portfolio projects about
like running and exercise habits
somebody who's prepping for a triathlon
I think I'm like I want to know what
else you've learned about yourself
through this process what else would you
try to optimize based on this because
the other side of it is when you get
into the world of data analytics and
you're doing this for a business again
you're not going to know everything but
the decision orientation is really
important data analytics for Academia is
going to be a little different that's a
lot more like knowledge for the sake of
knowledge but in the business we're
doing data analytics to help us be
smarter about the way we run our
business so if you can translate that
into the decisions you're making for
yourself or what else this informs for
you that shows me a lot about your
problem solving and ability to apply
this to the business world yeah personal
projects are so much more fun because
you're so much more passionate about it
versus like a Titanic data set or like a
Boston Housing data set it's like yeah
guess what I actually really don't care
that much about the Titanic it's am I an
awful person I haven't even seen the
movie like I don't really care about
that but a future project about Pokemon
or about running or about some movies or
music you like that's some music you
listen to yeah I've done personal
breakdowns of like romance novels I read
and they just send them it's so much
more fun like it's a much more
interesting way to hone your skills and
you'll stay more engaged with it it's
generally more creative and gonna be
something different to get started it's
absolutely helpful to like follow a
tutorial from a 13
udemy course but I probably already seen
that portfolio project
so as a hiring manager it's also nice to
be able to see something novel something
that's uniquely you and that doesn't
have to be huge it really honestly
doesn't even need to be big data but
anything that you can do that's unique
to you where you said I have a question
and here's how I'm going to go about
solving it it sort of brings that almost
scientific method approach into the data
analytics world yeah absolutely okay so
at this point you have like I think
you're looking at you're meeting with
five people is that right I talked to
six in the hiring federal state and four
of them went through the biggest gap for
the two candidates who exited there I
think was like visualization and data
exploration skills so then we moved into
the team technical interview where I
have two of the senior analysts on my
team go through much more technical
questions so in that stage you're gonna
see like let's walk through your
portfolio project and talk about like
how you build this in Tableau you put
something on top of public we're going
to talk through the stages of building
it so they're going to be vetting your
technical skills with a lot more detail
this shouldn't be a scary stage just
feel confident speaking to the stages of
not only how you did things like we're
not going to ask which button did you
push but think about the methodology and
why you chose to build something a
certain way so like if you chose to do a
calculation in SQL versus in a data
visualization tool why did you do that
and how did you go about figuring that
out those are going to be the sorts of
questions to talk to there
okay awesome so then your your analysts
you're kind of doing this like Team
interview now let me ask you this I mean
they've done this probably a few times
maybe in their careers right do you give
them questions do they come up with
their own questions they come up with
their own questions I talked to them
primarily about the goals this is very
similar to my management style in
general is I want to talk to them about
the goals what are we trying to find out
to bring it all back into data World
interviewing the form of getting data
this is a means of data collection so I
talked to them about like what do we
want to learn about the candidates at
this stage and I will help them with
writing questions if they need it but
for the most part I'm telling them like
I want to learn about their technical
skills I want to learn about how they go
about solving problems I want to learn
about how comfortable they feel in this
system and you should be able to come
back and tell me about those things yeah
I think that's great that's a great way
to approach it and something I'm not
saying that your analysts or you do but
something I've seen in industry is and
that's something I've done I'll admit
when I've done interviews is you think
you're going to have more time to
prepare than you actually do and so
you're like five minutes before you're
like oh crap I have to ask some
questions and a lot of the times people
are will have done this enough that and
they have kind of like the bigger goals
they can kind of ask the questions as
they go but I think as a candidate it
really helps you in that situation if
you have a project where they can kind
of base their questions off of because
that way you can speak confidently to
something concrete versus they're asking
abstract questions so I think it's again
when the projects can be really
impactful in these interviews yes and
that's something that if you can
practice it when you're interviewing for
this first role it's still going to
apply when you get Downstream and you're
interviewing for other roles in the data
world if you can talk about one major
deliverable you did when you were a
junior analyst that's what's going to
help you get that senior Analyst job
down the line is being able to speak to
that in detail speak to the impact that
that had the speaking to the additional
questions that you have a lot of those
interviews when you get more advanced
are going to be similar they just won't
be based off of this General portfolio
project so it's a good thing to practice
just for your overall career longevity
you just have to hopefully land in an
interview with your hiring manager who's
like thought about it from this
perspective because again if I were if I
was going to quiz you based off of your
prior experience when you're hiring for
an entry-level role like that's not
going to be a good experience for either
of us I'm not going to learn what I need
to learn and you're not going to really
enjoy this interview or feel like you
gained from that time yeah that's
something I should have probably
prefaced the whole podcast by that
Megan's awesome you guys and her team
sounds great and not every team or
hiring manager is going to work this
exact way but we're lucky enough to get
a little sneak peek behind the curtain
for this particular instance so
sometimes you won't get so lucky and
circumstances will be different this is
a good opportunity this is a good in my
opinion this is the way to hire entry
levels yeah and you can still use a lot
of this like again speaking to your
portfolio project if somebody does want
to come at you quizzing about your prior
experience and
in Edison like not the choice I would
make but again your portfolio can still
speak to that and especially if you can
combine your portfolio with any other
past experience it does not have to be
data analytics experience you can make
something really powerful and tell some
really interesting stories about
yourself in that interview especially in
the data space because everything is
data you've done some sort of analysis
you've done some sort of decision making
about something in your life like you
you should be making decisions for
yourself you should be able to explain
why did you want to get into data
analytics is there any sort of analysis
that went into deciding to go into this
field so if you were working in any
other field if that's like the medical
field if that's retail or customer
service you've done something with data
you've had insights you've collected
data maybe it was anecdotal and you
scratched something in a sheet of paper
you can draw all of this together and
stack it up with what you've learned of
data analytics to really sort of bolster
your experience
yeah 100 I agree with that a lot okay so
now you have these analysts interviewing
these people
what happens next
after that that's actually our last so
we do that technical interview and then
I'm reviewing all of the feedback so our
system
is we collect scorecards after every
interview and I have access to review
all of them so I can see something
that's been scored relatively
objectively across every interview and
every candidate and sort of evaluate how
that adds up so that'll be scoring on
things like technical skills how are
your SQL skills how are your Tableau
skills but it'll also include things
like problem solving and other soft
skills how are you as a communicator and
I can evaluate against all of that in
this case I had two candidates that I
was sort of debating between in the
final stage and then I made the call on
who to accept and offer to really the
differentiator for the candidate who got
the offer is we're an education company
we're here to help people upskill learn
data analytics was that she had prior
experience in education so all of her
technical skills were great her
communication skills were great her
portfolio was great and I had multiple
candidates who had all of that so her
differentiator was really that education
experience that was really helpful for
us it was something that set her apart
and made her like the perfect candidate
for us and I want to emphasize that here
I work with a lot of teachers who want
against data analytics and a lot of them
are fearful hey I don't have a technical
background I come from an unusual
background but in this case that
non-technical background the unusual
background was actually kind of the
super power that got her the job or him
the job
yeah like it's super super helpful like
I'd combine that portfolio combine all
the things that you've learned about
data analytics but the other things that
you know somebody out there is making
edtech software that needs to be sold to
teachers like you understand teaching
you understand the education world like
you can apply that knowledge to data
analytics in that setting be the perfect
candidate for that company rather than a
pretty good candidate for a whole sea of
companies and the same could be applied
again for like if you've got retail
experience or customer service
experience you might look at a customer
service analytics role which there are
plenty take your prior experience in
customer service and apply that to
analytics I did it myself like that's
how I got into analytics was I studied
Healthcare in my undergraduate program
and I took an analytics role at a
Healthcare company so when you can sort
of combine those things it makes a much
more powerful profile makes you a much
stronger candidate again like you don't
have to be okay for everybody okay for
everybody we'll get you a lot of like
looks but you'll get the offer more when
you can find a way to bank yourself like
just right for one company
yeah I love that and thanks for sharing
yours so I transitioned from chemical
engineering and when I was at Exxon
Mobil they had these things called it's
called a game and it was basically like
a company-wide analytics crowdsourcing
competition and I loved these things it
was so fun to participate in these and
at the time I didn't have my Master's
Degree and I was competing I compete in
these like data analytics competitions
against people with like phds in data
science a lot of the times I was able to
perform at the level of these people who
are much smarter than me who knew how to
do a lot more stuff than me because they
didn't know if sulfur and oil was bad or
good and like as a chemical engineer
that's like the most basic thing
everyone else listening to this podcast
is like I don't know but like that was
something that was so fundamental to me
like I understood the domain so
extremely well that I was actually able
to produce better analyzes because of
that background and so you guys need to
stop thinking my background is holding
me back no your background could be
propelling you forward you just don't
realize it yet exactly yeah if you can
find that sweet spot
really be
Omar on Canada it for somebody working
in that space like find a way to put it
together yeah it might hold you back if
you're coming at it from like a really
broad standpoint but it's not so much
that it's holding you back as other
people might have the background that's
propelling them forward so finding your
Niche is really important it helps a lot
in what can be a really difficult and
tiring hiring process there you go okay
so you hired this teacher and now their
data Junior Day analyst for you guys is
that right that's correct okay how's it
going so far she's been amazing she is
to take some
could drive her experience
experience she learned before she
started with us and all the knowledge
that she brought as far as setting her
up for Success I'm very thoughtful with
my onboarding plans so they actually tie
pretty well again with like that whole
career ladder it all goes together so
with that onboarding plan we take it in
sort of stages learn the business first
learn who we are as a company start
learning the people and then you start
learning the technology in that order so
we're gonna start you out with all of
the materials that we can share about
like what we do what our programs are
um and then you'll start getting
introductions to different teams who's
the head of marketing that you need to
know who's the head of sales that you
need to know all of those different
functions and then we'll start taking
you into our Tableau ecosystem so with
that we do
some asynchronous time we're going to
appoint you with this folder go through
ask questions as a technical team it's
like one of the best times to figure out
like things that are wrong and broken
because you've got somebody whose entire
job in that period is just to go through
and click on things and see what's
broken which is awesome
and then we do a lot of shadowing so she
spent a lot of time during her
onboarding period shadowing the senior
analysts on the team so like let's hop
on Zoom together and just go through the
day see how things are working to gain a
lot of systems familiarity and that's
not going to get you everything our
systems are big and complex we've got a
lot of data it's a lot harder when you
get into a larger older company like not
everything's going to be documented not
everything's going to be modeled
according to the textbook so you're
going to find some ugly data models and
some things that are confusing and you
just kind of have to work through those
but she's had a really great support
structure through the whole team to be
able to learn all of those weirdnesses I
don't think weaknesses is a word but I'm
rolling with it if you learn all of
those things that are weird and it's not
just about learning like our weirdness
there's going to be more of that at
other companies everywhere I have worked
has had weird stuff going on with their
data models where you just threw
something in there it's like a Supply
Closet that's like part of the way
organized and you just kind of have to
figure out where the paper clips are
things aren't necessarily where you
think they're going to be or set up the
way you think they should be so it's not
just about like learning how they're set
up it's learning how to figure out how
they're set up which is its own
challenging skill and that's not one
that you're going to learn in your
analytics boot camp something that comes
from on the job experience but it's also
one of those things that you learn that
really helps you level up and start
moving towards that mid-level or senior
analyst role absolutely I forgot to ask
are you guys a remote team are you guys
hybrid are you guys in person we are
remote fully remote okay so one thing I
caught there was you guys do have like
shadowing so you do that in Zoom because
I know a lot of people a lot of them
want the remote job of course but a lot
of them are worried that they won't get
the support that they'll need in a
remote job but they'll get stuck and
they won't know what to do and they
won't get the support that they needed
and I know everyone's not going to be as
awesome as you or your team but it does
sound like you guys have a pretty robust
plan of like no like we have some like
trainings for you to take we have some
tasks for you to do we'll hop together
and just make sure that you are
understanding where everything is so
these people aren't really left out to
dry they have help no we
so it'll be something like
or new hire will tackle their first
ticket where they will be doing that on
a zoom call with one of the senior
analysts just to help them walk it
through but they're doing it this time
instead of watching somebody do it we
set up a lot of that just in our
onboarding infrastructure but even
longer term
um my team does things like weekly
knowledge shares even without having a
junior analyst on the team that's super
helpful we all know slightly different
things we all learn new things every day
as we're working in data so we connect
on that knowledge share time we also try
to treat our team slack Channel sort of
like an open workspace so if you've ever
sat in the office and you've got your
four cubicles all next to each other and
maybe you're at your desk working and
like two people getting diagonally
behind you you sort of absorb it without
having to like be in a meeting you just
kind of pick up what's happening we try
to treat our slack Channel like that so
it'll be I'm not going to start a
private message to ask a general
question let me just throw it out on the
team slack gotcha and then when you have
time you can pop through and read it and
you can absorb it that way so it just
creates a lot of different ways for you
to stay connected keep asking questions
and then I also try to model all of this
question asking as well so that
everybody else feels comfortable with it
that's basically the whole process from
going from almost 300 candidates to the
one hired team member so thanks so much
for walking us through that I have a few
questions about it that I wanted to dive
a little bit deeper into so we talked
about how the background of the teacher
kind of set them apart to land this role
was there anything else that set them
apart that that made you feel like oh
this person is going to be a good hire
so early on when I'm looking at this
stack of 285 resumes two things will
always stand out and get you through one
of them is a tablet public profile like
that's just every time I see that again
as a hiring manager working in the
Tableau ecosystem I love seeing that
like you can actually show me something
you've done in Tableau she had one of
those so that's one of those things that
helps you move through that's also
helpful at the senior level one of my
senior analysts like I remember clicking
through on her resume the first time
because I saw that and showed some
really cool visualizations the other
piece is just thoughtful formatting so
making sure to call out your experience
first and foremost
um and that includes again
I think she had framed up like here's
what I've learned in analytics so far
here's my prior experience and then
focused her skills Elsewhere for your
entry level hires like I don't want to
see a three-page resume if everything
you've ever done I need it to be tidy I
need it to be quick but making it clear
right up front like this is what I've
learned here's what I'm curious about
here's what I know from me to move you
forward
so those are really like the two
standout things like upfront Downstream
she asked a lot of good questions even
in the interview and talked to me about
how she was continuing to learn so
working on data problems on leak code
and trying out different Tableau
visualizations like those sorts of
things were just helpful to see I love
seeing that learning attitude just
continuously because again you're not
done learning when you start your first
theater roll honestly you're gonna find
a lot more that you're going to run up
against and it's going to hurt for just
a minute where you're like I thought I
knew things and things are harder than
they seem so seeing that learning
attitude before you come on shows me
like you're ready to be successful
you're ready for the additional
challenges that helped me start getting
into like real messy data yeah okay
great so having some sort of a portfolio
was big and then having kind of that
inquisitive background was good the
one-page resume so even if they have
like let's say 20 years of Prior work
experience you're still for the one-page
resume for the century level role yeah
when
memory can be held be helpful directing
me to your LinkedIn can be helpful to
get the sense I don't need an objective
but an executive summary that says I've
been a teacher for 20 years and I'm
looking to transition into data
analytics that's helpful to see I'm not
reading more than the first page most of
the time to be honest there's a lot of
these resumes to go through so I'm
looking again at what you've been doing
recently what learning you've done
recently that doesn't necessarily have
to be working work experience but if
you've spent the last 12 weeks in a boot
camp that's most of what I want to see
up top and then I want to get a taste of
everything else and then I want to look
for your portfolio Okay so yeah you're
looking at it sounds like based off of
that your most recent experience
specifically like the one that's most
relevant even if it's a boot camp the
portfolio is kind of what you're looking
at because like you said you had
whatever 288 resumes to look through
let's just say I brought my calculator
out here let's say you did 288 resumes
let's say you spent five minutes on each
that would be a total of 24 hours which
is like three work days which I'm
guessing is not that's a little bit too
long it's a little too long yeah I'm not
gonna sit here and tell you oh it's a
two Second Glance and then I move on but
yeah I'm skimming I'm looking quickly so
I need to to be able to see quickly
again like have you done any sort of
major learning I need that to be up top
again that whole like being really fit
for purpose so if you're a teacher
applying a general assembly or an edtech
company or if you're a nurse applying in
healthcare like I want to be able to see
that quickly and those are really the
top things so when you're career
changing the overall volume of past
experience in a different field isn't as
helpful I mostly want to see the things
that really set you apart as a candidate
so again like that learning anything
formal you've done and the thing that
makes you tailor-made for my team as a
junior higher okay and with your
applicant system do you guys have like I
don't know some sort of software that
will also show you if keywords are
mentioned on resumes this is what I
teach in my program I can't remember the
exact I think it's called the 10 110
rule where basically you have 10 seconds
to make enough of an impression to get
to earn one more minute and then in that
one minute you could potentially earn 10
minutes so some of these candidates you
might have spent 12 minutes on some of
you might have spent just a few seconds
on right I'd say yeah that's pretty
accurate yeah I think 10 seconds is
around the decision window that says I'm
either skimming this and moving on or
yeah you caught my attention and I'm
going to read this in more detail and
catch more of it I do like a keyword
highlighter that just raises up puts in
bold so you've got Tableau experience or
SQL experience like that's helpful but
at the same time like my brain's pretty
hardwired for that so like it's not the
end of the world but if you don't have
it on your resume like I'm gonna notice
and I'm probably moving on pretty fast
yeah you've got to catch me quickly
there's a lot of these to go through
it's one of the hardest parts about
moving into this field I'm getting a lot
of applicants very quickly so anything
that you can do to stand out quickly
will help you move on to the next round
okay that's good to know and then the
last thing I wanted to ask you was how
long was this whole process from you
guys deciding you wanted to hire we
talked about you posting it maybe it was
up for about a week or so when does that
person's accept their offer and then
when do they start oh that's a great
question let's see
ended an offer like
like beginning of September
and she started in late September oh let
me see if I can find I'm looking for
like flipping through my calendar right
now that's awesome when did I talk to
our recruiter initially about that role
I started I was doing interviews in
late August when did I talk to our
recruiter I think I probably had my
first conversation with the recruiter on
August 1st you can see that on my
calendar now I think we extended an
offer like first or second week of
September and then she started in late
September so you're looking at like six
seven weeks all in I think another thing
to highlight that sounds like you guys
did well was once you got enough
applications where you're like someone's
getting here like you said maybe even 70
yeah you guys took it down but I don't
think companies always take it down
unfortunately and so I what I try to
stress with people I'm trying to help
and teach is we want fresh jobs because
like after the seven it's almost like a
seven day expiration that's not always
true yeah but a lot of the times it is
and yeah it's more likely for like a
senior more Niche hire that's going to
be up longer because we need to catch
more resumes like if I'm hiring like a
staff data engineer we had that position
posted for a while because it's hard to
get the candidates that you need in for
a role that's like a little bit more
Niche requires a lot more experience
yeah pet peeve of mine personally when
those job postings stay up forever my
goal is not to talk to every person who
ever might possibly have interest to
then find the best person of all of the
people my goal is to get a good number
of candidates who I think can do the
role and then of that group evaluate
who's going to be the best which is a
bit of a different perspective so I
don't want to leave that up forever I do
want to close it off
there's a lot of ways that this process
sort of goes off the wheels that are not
your fault as a candidate there's a lot
of things that I do specifically because
I didn't care for them when I was
applying for my first roles in data so
again like taking the role down when
it's gotten plenty of applicants if you
get rejected from a role like there's so
many reasons why that aren't necessarily
your fault that it could have just been
oh yeah we forgot to take that down that
we've already made a higher or like
we've got six people in the final stage
and we're not going to start the whole
process over again so it's a brutal
process it's very tough in a lot of ways
but it's important to keep in mind that
a lot of these rejections really have
very little to do with you yeah I love
that that you might be saying I was
rejected 20 times well guess what
correlation is not causation that could
just say nothing about you that could
say hey your resume needs some work or
that could say maybe you're not a good
candidate but you can't just jump to
that level you can't just assume that
it's because I'm awful I'm like there's
so many other things like the hiring
process is difficult on the company side
as well there's a lot of things that
make it challenging yeah but yeah a lot
of these rejection reasons have very
little to do with you it might be that
the position wound up getting canceled
or closed or they changed the job
description I've definitely had a lot of
those where both on the hiring side and
the getting hired side where you get
into the interview process and realize
that something you thought was a nice to
have was actually required and then that
job description changes so you thought
you were a great fit but it turns out
that like you were missing a secret
quality actually you even know is there
so there's a lot of things that again
really have very little to do with you
and your performance that can lead to
your rejection so it's a tough game it's
hard to evaluate like what do you need
to change if your resume is not clicking
but again like when it comes to making
it through this challenge just remember
like it's not all you there's so many
different reasons yeah I love that it's
don't be so hard on yourself guys that's
the message there's a lot of jobs out
there I know the rejection is tough but
try to find the jobs where you're more
of a niche Canada you have that good
background the portfolio helps and I
think not giving up hope is a big deal
right there okay sweet Megan thank you
so much anything else you'd give advice
to aspiring analysts and what they can
do on their job hunt yeah again patience
housing job listings and yeah you're an
ex teacher don't be like oh man none of
these are in edtech you can also take it
from the other angle of I want to go
work for an edtech company or I want to
go work for another education company
and go find lists of those go look at
startups that are recently funded
there's a lot of other angles that you
can look at it where the job might not
be posted or it might be posted under a
different title or it might just not hit
your feed so get creative obviously that
can create an incredibly broad world to
like get creative within the balance of
like what excites you most and what you
feel like is the best fit for you and
that helps you expand in a way that's
going to be productive
sweet I love it Megan thanks so much for
taking the time to talk to us and help
explain this whole job application
funnel and I know I learned a lot today
and I'm sure everyone else learned a lot
if people want to go and learn more and
follow you where should they go yeah
find me on LinkedIn okay awesome we'll
add that to the show notes Down Below in
the podcast Megan thanks so much for
coming on the show we appreciate it yeah
thanks for having me I know about you
guys but that was one of my favorite
interviews that I've ever done I feel
like there was so much gold so much
information packed in there that you
might have to listen to this one again
thank you Megan so much for coming on
and sharing all those valuable resources
if you guys want more valuable resources
on your data career Journey please check
the show notes down below I spend a lot
of time trying to help you in the best
way possible and I have a lot of good
resources down below thanks for
listening and I'll catch you guys on
next week's episode

Title: The Naked Truth about Data Careers w/ Data Manager Marijn Markus

Description: In this live episode, Marijn Markus & I talked about what it is ACTUALLY like being in the data field, how he transitioned from social science to data science, & discuss some real-world data use cases.

Marijn also shared his experience managing data teams, what makes a good junior hire, why you might not need machine learning, & much, much more.

You don‚Äôt want to miss this episode!



Connect with Marijn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/marijnmarkus/

Timestamps:
4:40 - Diverse backgrounds matter for programming and stats!
17:42 - Model explanations matter for business
21:00 - The real reason why generative AI became big in December
25:24 - Focus on what you know, not what you don't know
30:14 - You can't control the interview session? Think again!


Video Transcript:
do you have a non-technical background
and you're trying to break into data
analytics if so today's episode is for
you I had the chance to sit down with
meringue Marcus a data manager at
capgemini and talk through his journey
from a non-technical background in
social science to becoming a senior data
scientist and data manager we talk about
how you don't have to be perfect you
don't have to know everything it's
actually okay to use your prior
background in your data role it actually
will become your superpower if that
sounds interesting keep listening let's
get into it welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job here's your host Avery Smith
as always welcome back to the data
career podcast if you're new here
welcome my name is Avery Smith I'm a
senior data analyst and a data analytics
career coach and the host of the data
career podcast and my whole goal is to
help you land your First Data job that's
everything I'm here to do I have some
resources in the show notes or the
description down below that I want you
guys to check out to get some of that
help in today's episode like I said
we're talking to meringue Marcus who has
some really fascinating information but
before we get into it I just want to
take a few moments and thank you guys at
podcast listeners because the podcast
has really been blowing up recently and
it's all because of you guys liking
rating and leading reviews for the show
we have over a hundred five-star ratings
on Spotify which is absolutely
incredible thank you guys so much and we
have over 50 on Apple podcasts which is
absolutely amazing I work hard I pay an
Editor to edit these podcasts it's all
free for you guys we don't have sponsors
if you guys want to support the show one
of the easiest ways that you can do it
is just by leaving a rating on Spotify
or apple just click five stars should
take you 30 seconds and it really helps
to show grow if you're on Apple and you
want to help the show even more you can
leave a short rating review which
basically just say a few sentences about
why you like the podcast doing either of
those really helps the show move forward
and find other people like you who need
help in the data World it also keeps me
really happy and motivated to create
more content for you guys down the road
so
we'll keep the show free just leave that
rating in review and it really helps to
show out share with a friend and thank
you guys so much for listening let's get
in today's episode I'm really excited
today because I have an awesome guest
coming from the other side of the pond
we have meringue Marcus who is from the
Netherlands a managing data scientist at
capgemini has lots of years of
experience in the data science field
lots of things that we can learn from
today he's a data manager he doesn't
want me to call him that we'll talk
about that inside the podcast but he
originally came from social science so
meringue welcome to the podcast and why
don't you like to be called a data
manager because of the negative
associations I have with manager since
childhood okay what do you prefer to be
called then what's your title my main
problem is that many years ago I started
out as a social scientist mistakes were
made my dad wondered for years what the
heck is my hand gonna do with his life
but my quantitative approach of
Sociology criminology a lot of
Statistics basically meant I was doing
stuff like electoral forecasting
pandemic modeling works a lot on Ebola
and I ended up graduating on crime
analysis for my hometown of Rotterdam
and Rotterdam has a lot of crime we have
80 of all cocaine in Europe passing
through our Harvard so then I graduated
and I was still a data in statistics
nerd which was not sexy then I started
looking for a job and they said wow you
do algorithms to say who gets stabbed
and like how many times yes that's data
science so then suddenly I was a data
scientist I had to say yes because I
wanted a job this is Clary welcome to
the podcast Larry what's a cute little
cat for those who aren't watching my
four footed partner in crime but the
main thing you're is then I became a
senior data scientist because for some
reason they liked me and then I became
what's next after seeing you you're
managing lead whatever so I became a
managing data scientist which leads me
to today when you look at my title and
you call me a manager but that's not
what I worked for man all right I
understand so we'll call you a managing
data scientist then so you have a team
of other data people underneath you
right is that correct pretty much okay
and where so you come from the social
science background we'll get to more of
that here in the case which is not by
the way that is not necessarily a math
degree that is not a computer science
degree right that's not like a typical
background I don't think there are
typical backgrounds but in your team
does everyone have you know a math
background or a computer science
background tell us a little bit about
your team makeup oh and there is no
singular background like the big joke
we've had for years within data so
social science in itself can be very
qualitative or very quantitative
especially the American variety is used
to stereotype slightly more qualitative
my team you have to like the old data
science joke of take four computer
scientists stuff them in a box in a room
with data and expect magic to happen
this is why so many organizations five
six seven years ago failed to leverage
the data science and back then Big Data
boom because just get some computer
scientists and expect them to do magic
with data doesn't happen
I nowadays run teams where we have
theoretical mathematicians psychologists
econometricians there's this guy who
knows everything about Boeing he's
Aerospace there's one who did either
astrology or astronomy I keep mistaking
the two and he gets angry at me when I
do that but the main point here is that
we all have big big differences in
backgrounds that's why we see different
problems but that's also why we together
end up creating better Solutions we just
have a whole lot of arguing between in
between because data science
traditionally is like three things it's
programming statistical modeling
knowledge and a domain you apply it in
and no data scientist listen to me
students no data scientists Masters all
three especially not straight from the
start you either come from a
methodological statistical background or
you come from a computer science
programming background or you come from
a domain like economics or psychology
background and you start applying the
other two and this is why it's so
important for me in my teams because
you're never alone you work in a team
you know which bits you're good at and
which ones you're less good at so you
can work together as a team the perfect
unicorn data scientist doesn't exist and
if they exist they're probably too
expensive for you I love that because
it's hopefully it's giving hope to
everyone listening that like you know
you don't necessarily have to have a
math degree you don't necessarily have
to have a computer science degree you
can use your domain knowledge right so
when you got started you know you kind
of had been doing some stuff in school
like some stats classes and some like
you said some quantitative research that
you've been doing in school so you've
been doing some statistics right but
then you rebranded it you called it data
science you got a little all of a sudden
you're more you know you're more sexy
for the record my masters was policy
analysis and Big Data because back then
everything was Big Data do you remember
those like those memes were like this
was a different time but yeah I started
out with the terrible thing called SB
CSS if anyone in the crowd knows SPSS
but from there on I taught myself art to
do more advanced analysis I was scraping
Twitter in like 2013 back in the day and
from there you Branch out into python
because basically for my field what I
need is run regression analysis random
Force to actually boosts what whatever
so it was very much a behavioral study
focus and then years on no like two
years ago so quite into my career I had
the question yeah gender pay gaps this
company telling me no we no longer have
a gender pay Gap because said so in our
year report that we no longer have one
and I'm like I read a paper about this
like 10 years ago about how you use
regression analysis to calculate the
gender pay gap for a company to figure
out which parts of you know your company
you're paying too little and with all
due respect I've grabbed that all that
paper and stuff and now we've rebuilt
the same thing in Python but from a
modeling perspective from a science
perspective we were doing the same thing
as what a bunch of scientists have been
doing 10 and 20 years ago but nowadays
we're just scaling it in a data pipeline
so you can automatically run it every
year because data science end of day is
applying scientific methods to solve
data problems for people I'm not sure if
Sun Tzu said that but he should have
said that and that is my example of how
I use my background to this day in my
field so I had to get a whole lot better
at you know not creating spaghetti code
yeah for sure I mean I think we all kind
of write spaghetti good at the beginning
I help a lot of teachers a lot of my
students in my program are ironically
teachers their math High School Math
teachers in the US or Elementary School
teachers in the U.S or Canada and they
are like I don't have my backgrounds as
in teaching like how is that going to be
useful in the data fields but it turns
out a lot of them end up Landing roles
that use the education background
whether it's at a school district or in
some sort of like educational non-profit
and ends up being useful to them so it's
cool to see at least you know hear your
social science being used in terms of
like how does a business know if they
are actually if they have have equal pay
right what are some other use cases
where you've gotten to use your social
science background to use data and like
combine the two can you give us a couple
examples like there's examples all over
the place I work for capgemini nowadays
as a consulting firm so one of the
biggest Consulting Tech firms within
Europe so through that I get experience
in all kinds of governments Financial
organizations whose names I cannot
currently mention but I can give you
some examples
I spent a lot of time modeling refugees
so flows of refugees cross country
that's actually part of my whole
background to get into Data in the first
place because like way back Wikileaks if
you remember that Afghanistan and Iraq
Wars and trying to model that stuff
and all that came back to me when when I
was building models for parts of the
Dutch governments to analyze flows of
refugees across countries for which I
used of course the Big Mac index does
anyone know the Big Mac index I don't
know what it is dude you're an American
you need to know the Big Mac index all
right I'm here to learn I'm here to
learn created the standard so it's the
price of a Big Mac for every country in
the world for every year so the changes
the Delta you have of changes in Big Mac
prices is often a better Financial
indicator of like prosperity for the
country for the nation then the
statistics released by some of their
governments if you get what I mean oh
wow okay there's one big outlier in here
that is India because India does not
have a Big Mac they have a big Maharaja
I tried it it tastes exactly the same
but it's with chicken just so you know
FYI so if you have the Delta of like
there's the price of a Big Mac goes up
from 2015 to 60 in this country X then
2017 you will likely see more refugees
from that country heading towards for
example Europe and this is nothing about
analyzing yes or no Asylum cases this is
about caseload management this is about
having estimates of how many cases you
will need to handle how many beds you
need year over year and it's been a
while since I was modeling that
basically because Coke had screwed up a
lot of these models yeah but for a while
it was
in Europe we were able to use hamburger
prices to analyze this sort of stuff
giving me really weird looks like when I
where the heck are you getting this
stuff from hamburger prices and I'm just
like
there's this paper by this Norwegian
dude from three four years ago who wrote
about this and tried this and again data
science Appliance to the scientific
methods to solve data problems if I'm
modeling something yeah sure the first
thing I do is check git but the second
thing I do is check Google Scholar and I
start reading a few papers by people
smarter than me and how they did it and
then we copy paste that we don't just
copy paste the git code people or the
chat CPT code for that matter we can be
better we can copy papers
I like it read some papers on it that's
awesome Okay cool so you've worked on
some of the data problems you've helped
solve as I'm going to call you a a data
social scientist is that okay I like I
like that I pretend to be social yeah
sure well no you're solving social
problems like the gender pay Gap like
refugees I think that's pretty cool like
some other things that people could
maybe think about like that you might
solve would be like burnouts maybe how
people interact with one another those
types of things I've worked on burnout
models as well so that's actually a
public case by now Bernard and attrition
models if you have large amounts of HR
data so if you have a large organization
you can to some extent
indicate get risk scorings for
individuals for like over a year not a
specific time but long term who is at
low or high risk of a burnout but it's
not certain and you obviously can't go
to the person and say hey man the
computer's user says here you're at risk
of a burnout that ain't gonna help but
what you can do is run that analysis at
scale and if you have an interpretable
model and then we are again back at
random force that regression rather than
actually boost in deep learning
you can look at what the biggest
predictors are and for large
organizations not just at the micro
level this guy is going to drop but at
the micro level what are our biggest
predictors of this stuff what can we
address through policy that is actually
of incredible value to so many
organizations worldwide and sure there's
stuff like age or marriage is kind
of hard to change for individuals
through policy you know but there are
stuff like reward bonus systems pay
raises out at travel time our time which
manager is like that's all stuff you can
change and that's all stuff you need to
measure not just through business
intelligence and data but by running
statistical analysis and that's again
social data scientist coming in
we've been building models like this for
over 15 to 20 years already heck most of
the statistical methods that we use
nowadays Were Meant and made and
developed to harness and capture causal
mechanisms to measure how hard it's
discriminating minority or women or LGBT
or whatever yet nowadays in current
discourse we are all scared of
discriminating algorithms which is so
weird to me because I want my model to
be biased to be discriminating because
that means I I'm capturing the issue and
I can measure it and I can control for
it whereas if there's no bias in my
model I get very scared because I'm
pretty damn sure there is still bars I'm
just not measuring it and I can't see it
and I can't do anything about it so
please be happy when you have biased
models that means you're doing good
because unbiased algorithms do not exist
just like unbiased humans don't exist
and we need one to control for the other
interesting I like a couple things that
you said there one you know as a social
data scientist you're going to also be
working with people data at the end of
the day when you talked about the
attrition stuff so actually in module
let me think here in module 8 of my boot
camp the data analytics accelerator we
cover attrition data from IBM so we kind
of do the same thing that you mentioned
we make a linear regression that was my
first test of course because everyone
wrote about that there are so many
papers about it so yep you know you can
work with that yeah exactly so yeah he's
kind of a famous data set for that one
the IBM attrition data set and make a
pretty pretty standard linear regression
model but I like what you said because
like those models although really simple
like linear regression is doesn't sound
sexy a neural net that sounds sexy X 90
of AI in production is regression but
that's not fun and no one wants to hear
no it's not sexy but this is the same
thing as they start calling it all AI in
your sales deck then as soon as it's
sold they start calling it an algorithm
because that mean makes it less likely
the data private officer will kill haul
you it's all psychology and influencing
and marketing really it's a dumb title
look at the new Europe AI act where they
kind of fail to identify AI is anything
more than yeah well something involving
statistics so anyone listening here
anyone who ever did a statistics course
congratulations you're an AI expert
according to the European Union yeah
that is super true and you know a lot of
people who are getting started with data
they're like I want to do machine
learning and I'm like great let's do
linear regression you know multivariate
linear regression but they're like oh
that's not very cool right but that's
actually what's actually being used in
industry I use that at my time at Exxon
I use that at my time at Vapor sense we
used linear regression quite often and
one of the main reasons we like to use
it was because like you said it's
explainable right and you can you can
actually go back and say okay this is
kind of what's happening and this is why
this is what this variable is doing this
is what that's variable is doing and in
Europe especially you can't really have
a model that doesn't have explainability
right and you can totally have a model
is not explainable but you're going to
have a big struggle to get people to
believe it because again you're going to
get a burnout computer says so does not
work like I'm gonna be honest with you I
love the H2O stack been using it a lot
years ago because it basically allows
you it was one of the first automobile
cases where you can just throw your the
same train test data set into a
regression random forced neural net NXT
boost model to compare performance but
in the end our job as data scientists is
not to build a model but to pick the
right model and then build that and it's
always an equation between accuracy on
the one end and explainability on the
other hand and to find the right
compromise between the two because if
you can't explain why your model is
saying it business won't believe it
business won't be able to use it
business won't be able to prevent it if
I say you're going to sell this much
beer next month good for you but unless
I also explain it's because of the
weather and because of the bonus action
marketing says it's purely because of
the bonus action and because like finer
because fod is on TV then we can
actually make it actionable and for that
we usually need simple methods rather
than complex methods so our job is to
balance the simple and the complex
methods not go all in on deep learning
as don't get me wrong as cool as that
can also be but they're all tools in our
toolbox and our job is to be a tool
master and not a fool with a tool yeah I
like that so all those people who are
listening and they're new to the data
space and you're like oh I need to learn
neural Nets or oh I need to learn XG
boost or oh all this stuff right the
answer is sure you can learn those
things but they're not necessarily even
used that much in Industry 100 of the
time they are used in different places
but like especially when you take more
traditional companies like for instance
when I worked at Exxon Mobil for
instance one of my jobs at Exxon Mobil
was help decide how much gasoline we
should ship to different gas stations
throughout the year right before I
created an algorithm to do that guess
what that was a human's job and in fact
it's still a human's job job they just
use the tool that I created to help aid
their decisions because the majority of
the time it's very rare I mean there are
like there are hedge funds that run you
know algorithmic trading and it's
computers making the decisions with no
human inference but the majority of the
time humans are still making the
decisions they're just using the tools
the AI the data to help them make those
decisions it's very good that you
mentioned the algorithmic trading case
because that's one of the few cases
where you need like lightning quick
responses so you can't have a human in
between but that's a fraction of the
total amount of cases and indeed usually
it supports human decision making and
you're right that you we have to if for
instance if I am helping these are
called these were called Traders I think
at the time that we're sending these
different gasolines to different places
they've been doing this for 20 years and
all of a sudden some you know 20 year
old comes in with a hot shot algorithm
that says no we should actually be
sending this amount of gasoline it's
like okay you ask why and you go like do
you know that doesn't work because the
computer said so that's not a reasonable
response for these people don't get me
wrong individuals and consumers are more
than happy to use this this is the real
reason generative AI became such a thing
Market language models since December
they don't call Chachi patio Google
killer because it has better better uh
more explainable answers than Google no
but they're just easier to use because
with Google you have to click two or
three links before you get your response
and here you just get one straight away
and individuals and consumers about a
lot we care less about the actual
explainability and accuracy of it but at
scale especially as a company or as a as
a government and they can sue your book
for all kinds of things then you can't
do that and here we have again so
sociologists we have the individual
rationality leads to macro level
irrationality like Coleman 1990 that
whatever the consumer really likes is
actually really bad for organizations
and the other way around but my God we
love using chat CPT as individuals so we
go like can we use that in exactly the
same way for us as a company as an
organization and that's just really
interesting stuff these days because
there's so much
yeah it is it is a good point that we as
humans love ease but in businesses we
love money and we have to make sure that
we're making money we're making good
money decisions that's just about money
come on I prefer to be talking about say
about human lives I like to play with
that but that means I'm making a
difference so some of the hardest
toughest projects that were weird is
stuff I've worked on in a way like
there's this collaboration between
capgemini and the world food program
right now to help build a new data
platform for them to help analyze how to
feed as many people as possible as
cheaply and efficiently as possible
including like 200 food prices 200
nutrient values so okay grain prices are
crazy since last summer how do we
compensate do we grab a few more maze do
we subsidize broccoli do we import stuff
or do we just hand them out vitamin
tablets what is the cheapest way to
close the nutrient gap which is about
more than just starving but also about
lack of proper healthy food this is
crazy stuff down the line because you're
using this to advise governments and
better calculations means more people
fed down the line
bad calculations or mistakes or stuff
that means less people fed that could
mean people dead that's crazy that's
scary but it's also so important to have
data for such decisions and to not rely
on your gut feeling for that because
that is the status quo we're talking
about oh but database decision making
scary the status quo no data is even
scarier because then you're not even you
don't even know what you're doing you
can't even measure what the outcome is
so next time you'll do it again and I'm
just really proud to be able to work
with the people who actually built those
models who actually help people reaches
through the tech support basically but
that's also data science yeah
and it changes lives and that's where I
want to be good I think that's a good
point that you can make us a big impact
with data in that use case and that's a
really cool use case thanks for sharing
that with us I've actually built a
similar algorithm but it's much less
important I actually took McDonald's
menu data and found the cheapest most
nutritional food plan that you can get
at McDonald's tell us oh it's really bad
it's like two Dr Peppers a side of
apples two side salads and some oatmeal
I think is like what it ends up being
okay I learned something today thank you
yeah so I know what you're eating
tomorrow for your whole meal it all
taste the same man I've had a quarter
pounder in Chicago in Japan I tried to
get one in India but there's only a big
Maharaja over there and to my crazy
surprise it tastes exactly the same it
tastes like with all the respect but it
tastes exactly the same and that in
itself from a supply chain point of view
is so impressive because they have
completely different ingredient sources
blah blah blah and it tastes exactly the
same who knew that we'd be talking so
much about McDonald's okay now I want to
talk to you about kind of as a managing
data scientist when you're looking at
new candidates what are you looking at
what are you trying to see you know
especially someone maybe doesn't have
prior experience like what would make
someone a good candidate in your mind
okay this is for all the students in the
audience as well we're listening in
later back when I had my first intake as
a back then just new graduate social
scientist blah blah I was scared I was a
nervous wreck I was ruining but my
intake back then until
until the guy asked me one crucial
question what was your thesis about your
master thesis
and 10 minutes later I was done
explaining how we can analyze how many
people get stopped and how many people
do drugs based on social
Audits and questionnaires handed out to
the population and how trust between
citizens and people were checking
outside if kids are playing new checks
on them are actually good predictors for
all those types of crime then he said
that's data science do you want to work
here
the main point here was that it's scary
yeah I do was scary
but when you're talking about something
you actually know about that's much less
scary like if you like Dungeons and
Dragons or football then you're pretty
usually pretty confident when you're
talking about that so please don't try
to focus talking on stuff you know
nothing about like I tried that during
in text that really didn't work for me
and on the opposite end because these
days I'm at the intakes I'm also I I can
pretty quickly find out if they know
what they're talking about if it's like
yeah I built this AI model and I asked
what tools that you use get python or
something then it's like get out I've
had those kind of cute in a way my main
point here is that I almost always ask
about what your thesis about or what was
an important paper about because that
gives them a case that they've actually
worked on that you can talk about
because you already have experience
you've written papers you've done thesis
thesis thesis
internships those all count as valid
work experience heck my main role right
now by adcap Gemini is giving new hires
experience on pro bono projects like the
world food program project I just talked
about
because you were working in production
with this AWS environment and it's big
stuff and your work and you're having
calls with France that's experience you
've worked with data from this and this
client during a guide person during your
thesis that's experience so if you're
having talks or getting questions try to
relate it to something you actually did
and tell a story about that and that
doesn't even have to be your thesis or
any other paper I remember being asked
about iot and sensor stuff so I just
loaded up my phone and connected to the
raspberry pi over there in the hallway
that connects to most of my lighting my
coffee machine I have voice controlled
coffee it's like really nice here you
can do the front door if I push the
button now there will be coffee on my
floor so I'm not doing that all kinds of
stuff I got you're tracking the police
radio so if there's a fire nearby I can
go watch there's no fire right now it's
okay otherwise I'd have to like quick
yeah you'll stay I'm so glad yeah so all
kinds of monitor stuff and that was a
hobby for me because it was covet and I
was bored but I learned a lot from that
and then they ask okay what type of
connectivity should we use for your
sensors I'm like well zigbee has this
and this Advantage because I have to
build that for my own and they want to
see they ask prove it and I just grab
that phone and show them my house yeah
and that is more convincing stuff
because I did that and that can also
just be a paper who gets to them or
citation
then you are strong then you're
confident because then you are talking
about your expertise so always try to
guide the conversation and the questions
towards your expertise if the expertise
they're asking for then turns out to be
something different then you didn't mess
up
when you don't get the job then you
dodged a bullet yes I love that because
interviews can be really scary but if
you can somehow switch the interview to
be stuff that you know versus stuff that
you don't know I think that's really
impactful and one of the best ways is I
don't know about you maybe you're a good
interviewer but a lot of interviewers
prepare five minutes before the
interview what they're going to ask and
stuff like that right and so they're not
very prepared and if you can provide
them hey here are five projects I've
done about five things I'm really
passionate about or things in this
industry all of a sudden they're not
going to ask you like some dumb Hard
sequel question they're gonna be like
tell me about what you did in this
project explain why you did it like this
and then all of a sudden instead of just
like you having to respond to random
questions that you don't know the answer
to necessarily you get to tell them
about stuff that you do know and so if
you can show your passion and flip it on
the side like that I think that's really
valuable in ways then you are in control
yep so please do manage to be in control
so on the side I've been a dungeon
master for six seven years which is a
Dungeons and Dragons thing like
role-playing from stranger things it's
not the other thing you might associate
it with but being like the leader of
that bunch at the table during the
conversation actually taught me more
about handling teams and keeping like
five people with attention deficits on
the same story on the same line for like
four or five hours at a time taught me a
lot about how to manage teams how to how
to keep people engaged and that was also
experience so when they asked me about
can you lead teams legit I started
talking or how would you handle this
case with a team I just started talking
about how I handled my DND teams and
that was also valuable experience yeah
please don't tell yourself that you
don't have experience or that you don't
have value you just don't freaking know
it yet and the only way to find out is
by having some all the fluffer asked you
all those 50 questions and you go like
and then later on you go like oh I
should have talked about this hobby
project of mine and then next time you
get the question you are better prepared
because it is a dice Rule and the best
way to win a dice roll is to keep on
rolling so you get a 20. yeah I love
that I was gonna make a post about this
on LinkedIn today I don't think
recruiters are hiring managers reject
data analysts the most I think the
aspiring data analysts reject themselves
the most often like and it's so sad
because you don't think you have enough
experience you don't know you know what
a neuron that is or how to build one so
you think you're not qualified for a lot
of these roles or whatever but the
honest truth is you should make someone
else say you're not qualified don't be
the person to say you're not qualified
any recruiter will only spend a minute
tops talking down on you the rest of the
day it is yourself talking down on you
or in my case my cat now the main thing
here is you are Your Own Worst Enemy but
you need to face your fear so you need
to face yourself and the best way to do
it that is not by repeating the
conversation over in your head 50 times
but through practice and experience in
the same way that I tell everyone please
talk about your experience please talk
about your thesis tell me what went
wrong what was the data quality yeah the
data quality were yeah of course it
is it always is how did you fix it how
did you deal with it that gives you
tools to work with I love it and that
kind of goes on our theme of you don't
have to be a perfect data scientist data
analyst to be one if you're trying your
best you're learning it's usually good
enough and you're better than you think
you are Perfection is like objectivity
it's something for to strive for but
something to never reach again I started
out with a whole data thing in Conflict
studies which is very subjective if you
get what I mean because we're using
satellite images to monitor the growth
in Mass Graves and that kind of stuff so
everything thing is incredibly
subjective how do you deal with that
well not by denying it and trying to
pretend to be objective no but by
admitting your own subjectivity this is
why social science and ethics in general
is becoming such more of a thing in the
data field because that's what you need
to deal with very sensitive topics that
also involve data because let's be
honest every single damn field will
involve more data from now on the future
is bright for us but because we need to
be subjective and because we need to be
able to deal with that in the same way
we cannot be perfect and there will
never be a 100 accurate model with a
zero error rate even though business
keeps asking for that for some God
forsaken reason
you need to be able to deal with
uncertainty we as data scientists that's
one of the strongest things we can do to
help measure risk uncertainty odds blah
blah but it will never be a hundred
percent or it will never be zero percent
because this is stochastic stuff you
know the world is not based on rules and
zeros or ones only our minds try to make
things black and white occasionally my
cat tries to make things black and white
but I digress the main point here is we
have to deal with uncertainty we are
here to help your organization deal with
odds and risks and everything and that
is also a big storytelling elements and
to strive for Perfection for the company
or for yourself means denying that in
the end it is a dice roll and please
don't start telling yourself that it's
because of you it's causal it's blah
blah it's if then nothing is if then
it's All Odds so don't beat yourself up
over a damn dice roll just keep on
rolling the worst thing you could do is
stop rolling the dice so don't stop
rolling dice keep the applications going
I love it meringue thank you so much for
being on the podcast where's the best
place to reach out to you if people are
interested in learning more from you
LinkedIn okay we'll have your LinkedIn
URL and the show notes down below I
appreciate you coming on and sharing
your knowledge we're going to go ahead
and take some live questions and if you
guys are in the audience I was looking I
think we have like 50 people or
something live if you guys have a
question go ahead and put it in the chat
we'll take a couple live questions here
on the show that could be for meringue
they can be about social data stuff they
can be about being a managing data
scientist they can be about iot and
Raspberry Pi's and stuff like that so go
ahead and put them in the chat here's
one from a technical standpoint what
makes a great data or Junior data
engineer what kind of portfolios offers
the best value to recruiters do you deal
much with data Engineers of course we
always need what like any team you need
a data engineer data scientists data
analyst focusing hardcore on the
modeling and a visual person and perhaps
a business analyst somebody who can do
the talky talk PowerPoint so it may be a
scrum master so quickly you're filling
it in so yes I'm gonna talk from a
European Dutch perspective here because
that's the market I know and our food
can be great or terrible depending on
the country so beware over here if we're
talking about a data Engineers no
knowing different clouds is the game or
at least having some form of
certification or experience with it note
that certifications and Pokemon badges
are usually compensations for not having
experience in something so build your
own stuff for fun is usually more
educational than only getting a
certification in it same goes for for
classic stuff like knowing agile because
if you go to your intake and they go
look oh do you know how agile works and
they go like you go like yeah I have a
one day training in it that's not gonna
fly as much so focus on building stuff
in the Netherlands it's all Azure like
don't get me wrong I love AWS stuff I
think Google's stuff is cool too but the
market over here is just very as you're
saturated so look at whom you're
applying for and if you know what duel
stack they have then you know to be
interested in I'm not just staying here
mention the names they want to hear but
dual Stacks are important over there and
the other part of my advice is the same
that I gave previously which is to give
examples please even if it's just home
projects or internships those also count
you will convince them so much more
with stories of I've built this or just
showing them that then I don't know
references or more Pokemon names because
the recruiters half the time don't even
know all the Pokemons yeah that's that's
really interesting I think it's actually
pretty hard to go from like zero to data
engineer I don't see that happening very
often like usually you have some sort of
other data related role first or you're
you have more of a computer science
background or something like that like I
don't know about you maybe maybe you've
seen this but I've never really seen
someone like for instance me as a
chemical engineer go straight to data
engineering actually that's not true we
just had a student inside of the boot
camp who was a mechanical engineer go
from a mechanical engineer to a data
engineer role and he actually did it
kind of like you said with like at home
iot data projects really so I guess you
can if you have really good projects but
from my experience it's a little bit
harder than Landing dude I've seen it
happen too if you can coming from a
computer science or AI background and
going into Data engineering just because
they liked it
main thing here is that you don't want
to do what everyone else that's not
really a valid model to differentiate
this is an advice for the data engineer
as well as for anyone else listening
they will not hire you just because you
know a lot about the one title they're
looking for you can differentiate by
knowing more about the one topic than
all the other applicants you will
differentiate a whole lot better by
knowing more about other topics in
addition because usually they're not
just looking for a data engineer they
also have a dashboard stack that's
completely messed up or they have like
very big data quality analysis issues
they also look for that so if you as a
data engineer start explaining what oh I
can also do the modeling and I can
actually also do the visualization
they will be much more interested
because say they're looking for one
thing but they're actually looking for
three four five things with like a fifth
leg from your armpit and that is how you
they get interesting to you they might
and they might not even realize this
they didn't prepare this in advance
because they only prepare a few minutes
in advance but
to use my own example we were in a team
in the question arose from the day of
them the ethics officer so does your
model discriminate and they were like oh
God how do you calculate that and then
I'm like oh I wrote a paper about this
because social science background so in
the current field it's not just about
what you know within the field it's
about what you know outside that field
if you can also lead if you can also
draw if you can also speak and explain
if you can also I don't know hook up 50
kinds of crazy apis and that is what
makes you valuable so to figure out what
makes you valuable don't be what
everyone already is because this Market
is kind of saturated with people trying
to be everyone else don't try to be
everyone else try to be yourself oh God
I can't believe I actually said that no
I like it I like it I like it a lot okay
here's the question why is
fear-mongering tactics used to subdue
the population when it comes to AI or
any other technology oh come on this is
nothing new like the most intrinsic fear
of man is the unknown from the
psychological point of view so anything
new and that's not just AI we are scared
of in the 80 80s and 90s teachers tried
to ban calculators graphical calculators
after we also had schools that try to
ban Microsoft Word and auto correct is
evil as dangerous it'll mess up the kids
they won't be able to write anymore I
can't spell just for the records me
neither but the main point here is we
are still way more productive than had
we been educated without a typing engine
and only writing by hand and the schools
that did say oh we can't mess up our
kids it's bad conservative stuff
throughout the computers out the window
those students later on were not well
off in the labor market because they had
a more of a distance to the labor market
because they didn't have the digital
skills so we're actually to quote Bruce
if you're listening I don't think you're
listening from San Francisco but anyway
Professor friend of mine once said the
problem isn't that machines write papers
as good as my students today the issue
is that some of my students write papers
as badly as a machine and I still have
to give them a passing grade because
they wrote 5 000 words and six pages or
whatnot so we are actually now revising
the entire way we
deal with education because in the past
you've just got a an F if you have too
many spelling errors that's kind of out
of the equation on the whole these days
thanks to spelling Checkers so
we react because it's scary and it's
threatening the status quo the beauty of
technology is of course that it shall
always and at each and every time
threaten the status quo change is the
only constant so five to ten years
everyone was crazy scary about big data
about AI now everyone's scared about
generative Ai and it actively bothers me
because the biggest source of
discrimination and bias and threats of
AI and algorithms in the modern day is
not the Terminator future it's social
media algorithms who are hella
untransparent incredibly biased and
discriminating like you go on Tick Tock
you won't ever hear anything about ugurs
being discriminated in China never and
the average 18 year old in our society
is now mainly getting their information
from a social media platform controlled
by a state who doesn't really like
democracy that is scary stuff that is
the true bias in algorithms today and we
are not talking about it so the
fear-mongering isn't actually oh but
it's harmless fear-mongering no it is
actually dangerous because it distracts
from the real issues all right that was
good we're gonna end on these on this
question kind of about what type of
projects are considered most valuable in
terms of showcasing data skills what
about the scope of the projects how do
you evaluate the self-initiated projects
that use data from the internet and then
kind of a similar one here like what
about like in-depth ones versus not
in-depth ones a big one versus a small
one thoughts here target audience my man
and that also relates to the previous
Junior data engineer question you can go
very in depth on like one project but if
the recruiter you're talking to barely
knows Excel
you will very quickly derail the
conversation you can explain your entire
PhD worthy model and they'll still not
give about it because they did not
understand it so first step is to know
your audience whom you're talking to
what organization you're talking to if
you know the name of the recruiter
please google it Google is free for now
come on and that basically determines
how in depth you want to go if they ask
for somebody in the retail sector and
you have one out of three projects that
have something to do with beer sales
please go for that one don't get me
wrong I could talk for hours with you
about all your hobby projects and you
could talk for hours about mine but this
is usually a less is more thing because
in a pitch or in a moment you will not
have hours to talk you will have one
minute so you can think ahead about
which is the most applicable if they're
looking for a visualization case look up
the one that actually looks pretty maybe
just have a screenshot of that in your
phone because usually my demos die on me
so I have a screenshot on my phone to
this day this still happens so it's not
about just having stuff it's also about
matching stuff and to be able to match
to anything you just want to have a lot
of stuff so please
if you do an internship in the financial
sector if you're doing a second
internship do it somewhere completely
else this is why I like the Consulting
sector the Consulting sector as a whole
because you will be sent to Banks you
will be sent to retailers you will be
sent to I don't know I work with ngos
these days and that allows you as an
individual to figure out okay what type
of environment do I actively like what
am I actually good at what you like and
what you're good at are two very
different things and whereas like the
coffee fit for human consumption and
you'll find all of that a whole lot
faster if you do internships and like
assignments in different places than
when you have like a full-time job at
one of those places then you are
slightly more limited in how much data
you can collect and that goes for
references that goes for your projects
and that goes for your experience as a
person in your career and please don't
be afraid to fall flat on your face and
make mistakes because especially at the
start of your career we expect YouTube
that dangerous thing is if you don't
make any mistakes that you can learn
from because then you'll be making those
mistakes later in life last question I
saw how would one showcase their
portfolio
get Baby Gotta Get or learn to make a
fantasy dashboard and host it because
then you have hosting experience man I
love that we'll end on that meringue
thank you so much for being here keep
rolling the dice keep making mistakes
you guys and thanks for being here like
And subscribe connect on LinkedIn
afterwards Avery thank you so much my
man well you guys that was an awesome
episode I hope you guys learned a lot I
know that I did if you guys want to
learn more about data analytics I have
some resources for you in the show notes
description down below please check
those out and I'll see you guys on the
next episode

Title: From Music to Spreadsheets: Erin Shina‚Äôs 90-Day Transformation from Music to Financial Data Analyst

Description: 

Timestamps:
2:49 - Hybrid work is the new norm, combining office and remote setups. üíºüè†
6:00 - A supportive boss is crucial in advancing your data career. üë©‚ÄçüíºüöÄ
9:00 - Music therapy offers a fulfilling career path in healthcare. üéµ‚öïÔ∏è
10:11 - Discover how the Data Analytics Accelerator helped Erin secure a data job. üìäüîç
14:16 - Showcase your project effectively to increase your interview chances. üìÇüéØ
17:25 - Put extra effort into crafting an impactful resume. üìÑüí™
21:41 - Your current network could become a valuable referral for your next job opportunity. üåêüîó


Video Transcript:
are you trying to break into data
analytics from a non-technical
background if so today's episode is for
you I interviewed one of my data
analytics accelerator boot camp students
Aaron Sheena about her journey from
music a non-technical degree a
non-technical career to a financial data
analyst at Humana a Fortune 500 company
let's get into today's episode welcome
to the data career podcast the podcast
that helps aspiring data professionals
land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith today I'm
really excited about my guest we have
one of the members of the data analytics
accelerator who has gone through a
portion of the program and landed a
pretty sweet job that we're going to be
talking about today my guest today is
Aaron Sheena you studied music in school
but you no longer work in music so let's
start off with what you're currently
doing now what do you do for work now
sure so I am a financial analyst at a
Healthcare company called Humana
Nationwide and essentially I work in
risk adjustment so basically looking at
claims data the data that comes through
anytime you go to the doctor and make
sure that we're analyzing and filtering
it correctly compared to the government
agency that runs Medicare and making
sure that we are kind of aligning with
them so that we can predict how much
will be reimbursed for caring for those
members and so basically we then take
that analysis and use it to help us
predict revenue and make projections for
both what will get paid for or during
this year and then in future years as
well so yeah that's they're really
paired down version of what I'm doing in
a kind of complicated space but yeah
okay sweet that's awesome so basically
you know you have two music degrees I
think you have a bachelor's and a
master's degree and now I think your
official title is it a financial analyst
is that what it is yes yeah so I it's
two bachelor's degrees actually my first
one is in just kind of General music and
then my music therapy degree is another
bachelor's but yeah so even less
impressive right well I mean that's
perfect so so two different music
degrees a music degree and a music
therapy therapy degree you were working
as a music therapist and now you're able
to work as a financial analyst for a
Fortune 50 company you know solving
problems when it comes to Health care
billing it sounds like yes that's
correct that's awesome that's and that's
the journey that's a little
foreshadowing what we're going to be
talking about today so we're going to
get into what your background is and how
you got to where you're at today but
also it does look like I mean I'm no
expert you know I don't work for Humana
but I'm guessing that your background
back there is not the Humana offices so
can you tell us a little bit are you
remote are you hybrid are you in the
office right now I'm not in the office
I'm in my office at home I am I'm a
hybrid employee so I do have one office
day per week Ximena is like
headquartered in Louisville where I'm
from and so my team meets in the office
on Wednesdays and which works for me
really well since I am a very
extroverted person but the rest of the
time I am at home remote it's actually
rare that I'm in my office area instead
of on the couch that that's awesome and
I'm guessing that was not the case as a
music therapist am I right
it was not no I spent every day even
through the pandemic every day at the
hospital spending most of my time in
patients rooms sitting with them and
providing music and you know going
through that therapeutic process so a
remote job was a very big change for me
okay and how has it been I know you
mentioned that your extrovert is are you
lonely at home is it do you have good
enough interface do you get enough
support from your team yeah I'm really
lucky my team is super super supportive
we use Microsoft teams so I am my boss
constantly you know whether she likes it
or not but I do feel like I get enough
kind of interaction and I really love my
team and getting to see them on
Wednesdays but it's also really nice to
just kind of be relaxed at home while
I'm you know working on on my analysis
and on you know all of my daily tasks
and it feels very like right the pace is
still good I'm still you know kind of
challenged every day but it's much
different than you know having to like
go into the hospital and kind of be part
of that crazy environment that's awesome
I love hearing that because I love that
you're like yeah I'm in my my own office
today but to be honest my real home
office is my couch I think that's
awesome that you have the opportunity
you know the commute in the morning from
the bedroom to the couch must be very
you know full of traffic and stuff like
that you know all jokes aside you had to
deal with like a commute you had to deal
with traffic in your last job right that
was a decent amount of driving yeah I'm
very lucky that I live close to the
hospital where I was working but yeah I
mean it's I still have to get on the
interstate and you know make my way
sometimes traffic was worse than others
but it's yeah I much prefer when my dog
is the only one that's in my way trying
to get to the office now yeah that is
awesome I also have a dog and I can
testify of the power of having your your
dog as your co-worker it is like so much
fun and now I mean one of the things
that you probably couldn't do as easily
when you were doing the hospital visits
is like for instance oh let's take the
dog out for a walk or you know I got to
feed the dog or I gotta take the dog
outside or something like that so I
imagine that's gotten a lot easier since
you've been veiled to work remotely
yes yeah basil my dog is that she's her
quality of life has increased even more
than mine so that's awesome and that's
what matters most right we don't really
care about our own lives it's just about
our exactly yeah exactly okay awesome
and you mentioned that you're able to I
am your boss and that communication is
going well because one of the questions
I get is you know I want a remote job
but I'm also new to this field
um and I'm kind of nervous that like I'm
not going to be able to get enough
training or get enough support for my
team you felt like that's been pretty
good at Humana then yes yeah my boss is
a really wonderful mentor and the kind
of professional and personal development
that my company invests in has been a
really good support there are lots of
like modules and things that are
provided just like by default from the
company but then also my boss has been
really wonderful and you know we'll hop
on a zoom and I'll share my screen and
you know I'll say like this I think this
is what's giving me a problem but I
can't you know figure out what I need to
change or you know what is what does
this actually mean and she can tell me
and she'll kind of help me puzzle
through it and figure out you know where
I went wrong or how I should approach it
in the future or what to tweak and so
that's really helpful that's awesome so
you not only have like your boss you're
able to
you know a message anytime you get stuck
but you also have some sort of provided
learning so that you're not like stuck
with the skills that you're at right now
you can kind of upskill as you go it
sounds like as well right exactly yes
yeah my my next thing to tackle is
getting into some python for like moving
data from one place to another so I'm
excited to get started on that in the
next couple of weeks sweet that's
awesome very cool okay awesome so
actually while you mentioned pyth let's
talk about as you know an entry level
financial analyst new to the fields what
type of tools are you using on a
day-to-day basis yeah so biggest one is
SQL we use SQL server and kind of the
whole like Microsoft Suite all of that
lots of Excel for the kind of like
Financial part of it but most of my
analysis and most of the testing that
we're doing is within SQL and yeah
that's been it's been really fun to kind
of take the skills that I know like just
in my own little like simple projects
into you know actual like millions and
millions of rows of data and you know
see how it translates yeah I'm sure some
of it is very similar like like you kind
of have the base for it but it's
probably like you're doing things you
might not have necessarily expected and
using things kind of in a new way with
this new application yes yeah there and
there's a lot of kind of logical
like analytical thinking
and you know that's part of the learning
curve of going into you know this
specific industry like healthcare I
thought you know being in the hospital
every day I thought I knew all of the
acronyms that came with like the medical
you know field but apparently I didn't
health insurance is like totally
different so yeah lots of acronyms lots
of kind of The Logical analytical
thinking to get from point A to point B
and then figure out how to get there in
SQL yeah okay I love that and that's
something that we didn't necessarily
talk about I mean we mentioned your
background I mentioned your music
degrees we said the term music therapy a
couple times I wasn't familiar with
music therapy beforehand so maybe if you
don't mind will you just give like a
quick introduction to what you were
doing you kind of mentioned it earlier
but if I was a five-year-old what is
music therapy sure so you know the go-to
line I guess is that music therapy is
using music to accomplish non-musical
goals so in the hospital what I was
doing most of the time was using music
for decreasing pain decreasing anxiety
kind of providing that additional
emotional support that people often
don't get especially when they're going
through something that is you know
potentially like traumatic and scary for
them like being in the hospital and you
know we worked really closely with our
like hospice and palliative care team so
a lot of folks who are going through
kind of the end of life process and yeah
that's kind of what my daily life was
like yeah and I think that's important
to realize because one of the tips that
we talk about throughout the data
analytics accelerator is can we find you
a stepping stone job right because
you're new to this world of data right
you're new to this world of data you had
no prior you know math jobs or science
jobs right it was the music stuff right
but you were able to land this financial
analyst role pretty quickly like within
about 90 days I was looking I was trying
to find our exact when you told me you
had the interview and you had the offer
and when you joined like right before
Christmas and then I think you started
working like mid-march right yes yeah so
I like you know signed up clicked submit
or whatever on the accelerator package
like right before Christmas started
actually like doing the program right
after Christmas like the week before
Christmas and New Year's and I think my
job the interview was on March 1st
which was a Wednesday or whatever the
Wednesday was that week and then that
Friday I accepted my offer so yeah I was
not expecting that that's not even
that's not even 60 days because February
is not even 30 days right so that's
basically yeah so that's awesome and
absolutely incredible congratulations I
cut you off keep talking us through that
Journey yeah so I should back up and say
that part of what I was doing before
kind of getting into the accelerated
boot camp you know when I was looking
into data analytics as a potential you
know career move I did kind of what
anybody does and just Googled it and
landed on the Google the Coursera like
Google data analytics program and I was
doing that for a while I think I started
that sometime in the summer last year
felt like I was understanding things I
didn't I didn't have any you know
foundational knowledge besides like
using Excel for budgeting and you know I
think it was a really good introduction
into like what is data analytics and all
of that sort of thing but I didn't I
made it like three quarters of the way
through but I didn't feel like I could
like actually apply my knowledge in a
way that was helpful for me I was like
understanding it as I was going through
but there wasn't a lot of like there
weren't any steps after that so I was
looking for something that was just more
Hands-On and more like active for me
that's how I tend to learn best and so I
was you know just kind of looking to see
what was out there and I think you had a
sale going on I saw on LinkedIn and I
was like that sounds good you know most
boot camps are like five grand plus and
you know that's not something that in my
previous job that I could even consider
budgeting for in any kind of you know
reasonable timeline for wanting to make
a career move so I was like sounds great
this guy's cool I'm gonna just do this
and see where it goes and so from there
that's kind of when I started like doing
the analytics accelerator boot camp and
the curriculum and I think it that is
what really made a big difference for me
yeah I think your story is you know very
similar in fact someone emailed me today
and said you know how is your program
different than the Google data cert
which is a common question and I think
you kind of know that like actually
applying what you've learned right and
then really focusing on creating the
projects and the networking right
because at the end of the day if you
don't have the projects you don't have
the network it's a lot harder to land
that job and then also just doing it
kind of with someone like someone that's
able to you know talk to you I know you
were pretty active on our community so
having all the peers around you I think
that's pretty helpful for most people
and the other thing you did really well
is and I mean I think this was helpful
you can tell me if I'm wrong but you
were trying to land a day a job you know
you don't have necessarily the what
people would consider the traditional or
the ideal background I don't think there
is a traditional or ideal background for
data analytics but that's besides the
point but you found this job inside of
healthcare and you have been working in
healthcare as this music therapist
you've been visiting hospitals like you
said you know Hospital speak a little
bit like the acronyms and stuff like
that did that play a role in helping you
land this job like was that helpful to
know the hospital stuff yeah I think so
you know especially
during my interview process that was
something that I spoke to a lot you know
and having kind of that background
knowledge of just how the industry works
and understanding like yeah I might not
know like the back end of health
insurance but I know like what these
things mean and I know you know kind of
why things are set up the way that they
are even if I don't know the details of
like
how it works on the back end and one of
the projects I think that really helped
me kind of be able to speak to that was
the SQL project in the accelerator the
healthcare analysis that was something
that I talked about in all of the
interviews that I had and they were
really interested to know you know not
only to see that I had some SQL skills
but also just to see like that I had
used my prior knowledge and like how I
had applied that understanding of the
industry to the analysis like with SQL
so that I think was really helpful for
me yeah in that whole interview process
gosh I actually I mean I should have
realized that but I didn't even I didn't
even realize that and that's so cool
because they're like hey we're hiring
for a financial data analyst role the
hope is that someone will understand
data analytics they'll understand SQL
and they'll understand hospital or I
guess Healthcare data and you were like
oh well here's a project I've done that
you can read where I analyzed I can't
remember how much data is in that one
like 1.6 million rows of hospital to
like looked at outcomes and like looked
at like what procedures led to these
different things and how race played and
role in the hospital and stuff like that
and you're like just here you go this is
my evidence right are you interested
that must have been really powerful for
the recruiter they're like oh wow SQL
projects with Healthcare data I'm sure
they didn't have very many other
projects like that I were to guess I
don't know but if I were to guess I
don't know who else applied but
apparently I did something right so yeah
because you interviewed and then like
three days later had an offer yeah yeah
that's amazing that's so amazing
congrats thank you one of the things I
just want to I want to highlight that
makes me so happy to hear because when I
was designing the analytics accelerator
I was like okay we have to do projects
and to be perfectly honest when I first
got into helping people land data jobs I
had the same philosophy that projects
were the way
but I had a little bit of a Different
Twist where I was like projects should
be fun it's always fun to do your own
personal data so when I originally
launched my boot camp all of the
projects were actually from your own
life like your own screen time on your
phone the data the music you listen to
you know and stuff like that and that
those projects are really fun and I
think they're very impressive to
recruiters and hiring managers they were
a little bit harder because it's just
hard keep getting your own data but now
that we've transitioned to you know
using data from all the different
Industries I'm so happy to hear that we
when I was choosing the nine Industries
for the nine projects I was like man
there's so many Industries which ones do
we choose and I'm so glad to hear that
the healthcare and the sequel combo was
at least useful for one person that's so
good yes yes
for sure
actually I think
just having the projects in general and
having the specific like specific tools
for a specific project I think was
really helpful and you know maybe just
also to highlight another aspect of the
boot camp I think the difference for me
I was applying to things um kind of you
know throughout the whole the time that
I was you know doing all the modules and
I wasn't really getting a lot of bites
and you know kind of trying to network
and get referrals for jobs but I think
the thing that made the difference was
having I went to one of your I don't
remember if it was a live session or
just a module but all about resumes and
like optimizing your resume and so I
added like literally as I was watching I
was like okay I'm gonna add these links
to my portfolio projects I'm going to
add you know a blurb about what I
learned what I analyzed what I want and
why and what I found and I like sent off
a round of applications kind of with
that new resume with my projects added
like an actual section not just a link
to my to my portfolio site
and I like literally had three
interviews lined up for like that same
week from just that difference and that
was you know one of the one of those
interviews that I had is the role that I
ended up accepting did you apply to that
job or did they find you so I applied
for it I have I know several people that
also work for Humana and I had someone
who was willing to let me be a or be you
know my referral so definitely worked
kind of with my network and connecting
with people to get my in human is a
company that I have you know considered
working for a long time and you know I
know just from having those personal
relationships with people here that
they're they treat their employees
really well and so I was like oh yeah
that's like a company I really want to
work for so that's kind of how I was
focusing my networking attention but
yeah I had very quick turnaround from
submitting those applications to hearing
from recruiters for the specific
positions okay there's a lot there I
want to unpack number one did you apply
on like LinkedIn jobs Indeed or on their
website on their website so I found them
on LinkedIn but I went to the website to
apply to one of the things I want to
highlight here is I don't know if you
remember this but the job description
it probably said hybrid on the job
description do you think and I want to
highlight that because I've no this is
like a super underrated play that
everyone is sleeping on right now and
that's the idea of hybrid jobs everyone
is like oh I don't want to be in person
right so they go and they go to LinkedIn
jobs they use the Boolean search for
remote and they're competing with
literally thousands of other people for
these remote jobs because literally you
can be all over the us or the world
right and be an applicant for this job
but like your role you're in the office
like what eight hours a week on
Wednesday if you want to like you know
work from home from you know the rest of
the days you can if you want to I don't
know humana's exact policy but let's
just say you want to go visit your
parents or I don't know your brother
right you could you could leave
Wednesday night and come back home you
know Tuesday night like that's like a
week that you could be working somewhere
else like you're not quite remote but
you're 90 sent there right I guess I
guess literally 75 right or what 80
there yeah 80 yes but it's pretty good
right yeah and like I said I am a really
extroverted person so I really like you
know I think we get less done on
Wednesdays than we do like when we're
all remote you know because we're
catching up with each other and you know
socializing a little bit but yeah we
have my team has a lot of freedom
outside of those in-person days and you
know if you do need to take a remote day
that's also fine you know I had a
co-worker yesterday who was like yeah I
just I'm not feeling super well not well
enough to not work but can I just stay
home today and my team was like yeah of
course just call into the meeting that
we have and we'll be fine
so there's a lot of flexibility there
and that's awesome and I think people
are like no I only want a remote job but
the hard thing is like when you're doing
a remote job you're competing with
people you know not only in Louisville
right you're commuting people all over
the country but if you're hybrid that
job pool that they're selecting from the
Canada pool is so much smaller and so
you can stand out so much more as a
candidate the third thing I want to
mention is you know you mentioned the
refer and people are going to be like
well okay I don't know anyone you know
No One's Gonna refer me but the people
that referred you what what part of the
company do they work for not mine
um yeah there are several organizations
kind of within Humana
um and they are in one that is parallel
with mind but they are not in finance at
all I even asked her she she like looked
into some of the jobs when I was talking
with her and she was like yeah I don't
know these hiring managers but I know
this person who you know worked with
this other person you know she kind of
connected some dots but she didn't know
anyone personally who was like in charge
of hiring or you know the next like
three steps up from my manager so yeah I
think it's a powerful thing to even if
you aren't if you can get a referral
from someone even if they aren't
directly involved with the position that
you're applying for I think it's really
worth it to try to you know still build
those relationships and and see if they
can help you out Yeah a hundred percent
like when I'm working with a lot of
people they're like Avery I don't know
anyone to get referrals and the answer
to that is bull crap unless you're like
you're brand new to the country and
you've never like you don't speak
English or like you haven't really met
people like you at least know someone
who works somewhere and sometimes that
person's gonna work uh like as a grocer
at like at like Smith's family Grocery
and like that's not going to be useful
but like you probably have at least you
know 20 contacts in your phone like open
up your phone and go through one by one
and just be like okay Paul Adams where
does he work Alejandra okra Lund where
does he work Paul allstrom where does he
work you know and think through do these
people work for a company that have an
opening for a data analyst yes or no and
if they do it doesn't matter if they're
in marketing or if they're in sales or
if they're you know really doesn't
really matter because the company just
wants to kind of hire good people and if
that person's at that company that's
probably because they think that
person's a good person so if that person
has a friend that's probably also
another good person and so just having
any sort of referral from any company
employee I think is worth exploring and
I think it gives you a leg up in the
application so I think a job well done
from you because you went for the hybrid
you went for the referral and I mean
that's what allows you to you know do an
interview and then bam you have an offer
like two days later yeah it
it was short process us you know from
starting getting into Data at all to you
know accepting a job offer but I think
the steps that I took in the last you
know couple of months of that Journey
really made the difference and yeah a
lot of it was kind of prompted by the
accelerator program so thank you for
that yeah of course for I'm so glad it
worked out for you okay before we let
you go I gotta ask you a few more
questions about the interview was it
technical no and maybe part of it was
because I had projects to kind of show
what I knew but we didn't there wasn't
like an assessment for me for any of the
jobs that I interviewed for you know
kind of in that round of interviewing I
talked about my projects a lot they
asked questions about the projects
themselves and kind of specifically what
I like the projects you had done yes
yeah so the healthcare one I talked
about oh I forget which is which now but
I talked about the I think Massachusetts
education one
um I talked about that one I talked a
little bit about the data visualization
one that I had on my portfolio but yeah
I like they would ask me specific
questions about you know like what was
your process with this what did you know
how did you come to this conclusion
based on this data and things like that
rather than like you know here is a data
set can you query this like I didn't
have to do any of that like really
technical stuff I think because they
could see that I knew you know how to at
least do a select firmware statement and
then they could ask me those deeper
level questions yeah based on my
portfolio I think that's so powerful
because one of the things we talk about
in daa is the a lot of times the people
interviewing you are busy people and
they don't want to be interviewing you
and so so they're coming in with
questions five minutes before they're
actually doing the interview that's not
true of everyone but a lot of times I've
hired people and I know that I've done
that before so sometimes if you give
them projects all of a sudden you just
gave them material for them to ask you
questions about and you kind of flipped
the interview where you're you've almost
made the interview about stuff that you
know and stuff that you've done versus
them just like randomly asking you
questions which I think is really it
makes it way less nerve-wracking and it
makes you look more impressive so I
think that's a win-win so overall you
felt prepared and it was just the one
interview yes so for the role that I had
it was in person which was helpful for
me because I tend to do really well when
I'm talking to people and feel less
nervous than you know if I'm if it's
like a phone interview or something like
that but we did it was one day that
interviews with several people on the
team but we had really similar
conversations kind of between that as
pertains to kind of their role and the
difference between the role that they're
hiring for but yeah I felt really parent
I felt like I knew what I was talking
about kind of going in I obviously had
done these whole projects and could
speak on them and so that made me feel
really confident in my skills and also
in my like
you know presence and being able to
really engage with them instead of being
worried about you know am I going to
remember how to like what the syntax is
for this you know specific thing that
they're going to ask me about
yeah that's awesome I love that the
project Springs confidence that's an
important takeaway yeah okay and then we
did have a question here you can answer
this to your heart's content as much as
you do or not but the question is did
you feel the need to negotiate or were
you pretty happy with your offer so as I
mentioned I had interviews for three
different roles kind of you know all at
the same time it was that like last
round of applications that I sent in
after changing my resume
had all those interviews within you know
that same week the the ones on that
Wednesday were the last ones and a the
recruiter contacted me and actually said
that I had gotten offers from all three
and that they wanted to that they wanted
to you know see what was my preference
and that sort of thing and I didn't
negotiate with numbers necessarily but I
said that a salary would put play a part
in my decision of which role to take and
so I asked if they could give me you
know a range for each one so they came
back with that and you know told me the
ranges of what they could offer for each
role and then I was really happy that
the one that I had wanted the most did
actually have you know the highest offer
as well the highest range and so I you
know happily took that one so I didn't
have to necessarily negotiate and then
when I like accepted that offer they
said it was going to be the highest end
of the range they'd given me they just
gave me that top number so you got what
you wanted exactly yeah I didn't have to
like you know negotiate like face to
face with somebody but you know letting
them know that was an important part of
my decision I think that's good A lot of
people will talk about negotiating and I
think I'm probably not the best teacher
of negotiation if I'm being honest I've
never really negotiated that much but so
many students in our program have just
been so happy with the offer that they
get that that I mean is always probably
a good idea but anyways a lot of people
have just been super happy that they're
like I'll take it I'm so so stoked with
this right someone offered me 10 million
dollars right now to go work for them
I'm not negotiating I've taken the 10
million dollars right and I mean kind of
the same idea there hey so one with this
any advice that you'd like to give to
people with non-traditional backgrounds
people with Maybe music backgrounds what
would you say and that helped you and
your journey or what advice would you
give them yeah so number one piece of
like actionable advice is to do projects
do projects that are based on
skills that you have or you know the
industry that you have and then also
ones that show that you have knowledge
for where you want to go so if it's
Healthcare if it's you know marketing
like whatever
you're trying to kind of break into do
projects with that show that you know
how to use the technical skills in that
industry
and then just in general I think
something that I realized through my
journey
was that even if you are like just
starting and you don't really have a
whole lot of like foundational knowledge
to go off of
you are
more capable and you know a lot more
than you think that you do you know
everything transfers to everything else
I guarantee that there's something that
you like do in your daily job that
relates to you know your data analytics
learning and I think that if you have
started on this journey and you know are
even if you are at the beginning you've
done the hard part of like making the
decision and starting and so now it's
just about consistency and you know
keeping that going
I I love that I hope you guys listening
take that to heart keep in mind that was
a music therapist telling you that you
have something
in your current job that is relatable to
data analytics if you ask me like the
most opposite of a data analytics job
ever I might say a music therapist but
you're absolutely right Aaron that no
matter what you're doing you can relate
something to what you're currently doing
it is experience for a data analyst job
so you know don't be discouraged when
you see you know one to two years of
experience two to five years of
experience you have some sort of
experience that you can draw and I loved
the advice on doing projects so Aaron
thanks so much for being on the show
thanks for sharing it with all of us
here
thanks so much for having me how great
was Aaron and her story big shout out to
her for coming on the Pod and sharing
that with all of us and I hope that you
guys can kind of take a lot from her
journey the idea of trying to apply to
jobs quickly the idea of using her
network the idea of looking at hybrid
jobs and also the importance of projects
as always you guys I have some resources
in the show notes down below to help you
guys get started on your data Journey
I'm here if you have any questions and
would love to have you be part of the
data analytics accelerator if that's of
interest to you you can look in the show
notes Down Below have a good weekend
everyone and data on

Title: Music to Analytics: Erin Shina's 90-Day Data Journey

Description: Join us as we interview my bootcamp student Erin Shina who recently pivoted her career from music therapy to a financial analyst role at Fortune 50 company, Humana.

Video Transcript:
I just pressed the wrong button
all right welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job here's your host Avery Smith
hello everyone and welcome back to
another episode of the data career
podcast uh hello if you are watching
live from YouTube or on LinkedIn just
got the notification looks like that
we're going live so uh say hello in the
comments we'd love to see your name and
say hello to you guys uh today I'm
really excited about my guest we have
one of the members of the data analytics
accelerator who has gone through a
portion of the program and landed a
pretty sweet job that we're going to be
talking about today my guest today is
Aaron Sheena Aaron welcome to the data
career podcast thank you so happy to be
here yeah so excited that you agreed to
come on the show and talk a little bit
about your your journey which I think is
something that's really unique and
something that needs to be told because
you have a pretty interesting background
uh you studied music in school but you
no longer work in music so let's start
off with what you're currently doing now
what do you do for work now
sure so
um I am a financial analyst
um at a Healthcare Company um called
Humana uh Nationwide
um and essentially I work in risk
adjustment
um so basically looking at claims data
the data that comes through anytime you
go to the doctor
um and make sure that we're analyzing
and filtering it correctly compared to
the government agency that runs Medicare
um and making sure that we are kind of
aligning with them so that we can
predict how much will be reimbursed for
caring for those members
um and so basically we then take that
analysis
um and uh use it to help us predict
revenue and make projections for
um both what we'll get paid for or
during this year and then in future
years as well
um so yeah that's kind of the the really
paired down uh version of of what I'm
doing in a kind of complicated space but
um yeah okay sweet that's awesome so
basically you know you have two music
degrees I think you have a bachelor's
and a master's degree and now I think
your official title is it a financial
analyst is that what it is yes yeah
um so I it's two bachelor's degrees
actually I
um my first one is in just kind of
General music and then my music therapy
degree is another bachelor's
um but uh yeah so even less impressive
right
but I mean that's perfect so so two
different music degrees a music degree
and a music therapy degree you were
working as a music therapist and now
you're able to work as a financial
analyst for a Fortune 50 company you
know solving problems when it comes to
Health care billing it sounds like yes
that's correct that's awesome that's and
that's the journey that's a little
foreshadowing uh what we're going to be
talking about today so we're going to
get into what your background is and how
you got to where you're at today
um but also it does look like I mean I'm
no expert you know I don't work for
Humana but I'm guessing that your
background back there is not the Humana
offices so can you tell us a little bit
are you remote are you hybrid are you in
the office right now I'm not in the
office I'm in my office
um at home I am I'm a hybrid employee so
I do have one office day per week um
Humana is like headquartered in
Louisville where I'm from
um and so my team meets an office on
Wednesdays and
um which works for me really well since
I am a very extroverted person
um but the rest of the time I am at home
remote
um it's actually rare that I'm in my
office area instead of on the couch so
that that's awesome um and I'm guessing
that was not the case as a music
therapist am I right
uh it was not no I spent
um every day even through the pandemic
um every day at the hospital spending
most of my time in patients rooms
um sitting with them and and providing
music and
um you know going through that
therapeutic process
um so a remote job was a
a very big change for me okay and and
how has it been I I know you mentioned
that your extrovert is are you lonely at
home is it do you have good enough
interface do you get enough support from
your team
yeah I'm really really lucky my team is
super super supportive um we use
Microsoft teams so I I am my boss
constantly
um you know whether she likes it or not
but
um I I do feel like I get enough kind of
interaction and
um I really love my team and getting to
see them on Wednesdays but it's also
really nice to just kind of
be relaxed at home while I'm you know
working on
um on my analysis and on you know all of
my my daily tasks
um and it it feels
it feels very like right the pace is
still good I'm still you know kind of
challenged every day but it's much
different than
um you know having to like go into the
hospital and kind of be part of that
crazy environment
that's awesome I I love hearing that
because I love that you're like yeah I'm
in my my own office today but to be
honest my real home office is my couch I
think that's awesome
um that you have the opportunity you
know the commute in the morning from the
bedroom to the couch must be very you
know full of traffic and stuff like that
but you know all jokes aside you had to
deal with like a commute you had to deal
with traffic in your last last job right
that was a decent amount of driving
yeah I I'm very lucky that I live close
to the hospital
um where I was working but yeah I mean
it's I still have to get on the
interstate
um and you know make my way
um sometimes traffic was worse than
others but it's yeah I uh I much prefer
when my dog is the only one that's in my
way trying to trying to get to the
office now yeah that that is awesome um
I also have a dog and I can testify of
the power of having your your dog as
your co-worker it is like so much fun
um and and now I mean one of the things
that you probably couldn't do as easily
when you were doing the hospital visits
is like for instance oh let's take let's
take the dog out for a walk or you know
I got to feed the dog or I gotta take
the dog outside or something like that
so I imagine that's gotten a lot easier
since you've been nailed to work
remotely yes yeah basil my dog is uh
she's her quality of life has increased
even more than mine so
that's awesome and that's what matters
the most right we don't really care
about our own lives it's just about our
exactly yeah exactly okay awesome
um and you mentioned that you're able to
I am your boss and that communication is
going well because one of the questions
I get is you know I want a remote job
but I'm also new to this field
um and I'm kind of nervous that like I'm
not going to be able to get enough
training or get enough support for my
team you felt like that's been pretty
good at Humana then yes yeah
um my boss is a really really wonderful
Mentor
um and the the kind of professional and
personal development that
um my company invests in
um has been a really really good support
um there are lots of like modules and
things that are provided just like by
default from the company
um but then also my boss has been really
wonderful and you know we'll hop on a
zoom and I'll share my screen and you
know I'll say like this I think this is
what's giving me a problem but
um I can't you know figure out what I
need to change or you know what is what
does this actually mean
um and she can tell me and she'll kind
of help me puzzle through it and figure
out
you know where I went wrong or how I
should approach it in the future or what
what to tweak
um and so that's really really helpful
that's awesome so you not only have like
your boss you're able to
you know a message anytime you get stuck
but you also have some sort of provided
learning so that you're not like stuck
with the skills that you're at right now
you can kind of upskill as you go it
sounds like as well right
exactly yes yeah my uh my next thing to
tackle is um getting into some python
for like moving data from one place to
another so
um I'm excited to get started on that in
the next couple of weeks sweet that's
awesome very cool
um okay awesome so actually while you've
mentioned python let's talk about as you
know an entry-level financial analyst
new to the fields what type of what type
of tools are you using on a day-to-day
basis
yeah so biggest one is SQL
um we use SQL Server
um and kind of the whole like Microsoft
Suite all of that
um lots of Excel for the kind of like
Financial part of it
um but most of my analysis and most of
the testing that we're doing is within
SQL
um and yeah that's been
it's been really fun to kind of
take uh the skills that I know like
uh just in my own little like simple
projects into you know actual like
millions and millions of rows of data
um and you know see see how it
translates yeah I'm sure it's very
similar like like you kind of have the
base for it but it's probably like
you're doing things you might not have
necessarily expected
um and using things kind of in a new way
with this with his new application
yes yeah there and there's a lot of um
kind of logical
like analytical thinking
um and you know that's part of the
learning curve of
going into you know this specific
industry
um like healthcare I thought you know
being in the hospital every day I
thought I knew all of the acronyms
um that came with like the medical You
Know Field
um but apparently I didn't health
insurance is like totally different so
um yeah lots of acronyms um lots of kind
of
the The Logical analytical thinking to
get from point A to point B and then
figure out how to get there in SQL
yeah okay I love that and that's
something that we didn't necessarily
talk about we I mean we mentioned your
background we mentioned your music
degrees we said the term music therapy a
couple times I wasn't familiar with
music therapy beforehand so um maybe if
you don't mind will you just give like a
quick introduction to what you were
doing you kind of mentioned it earlier
but if I was if I was a five-year-old
what is music therapy
sure so
um you know the go-to line I guess is
that music therapy is using music to
accomplish non-musical goals so
um in the hospital what I was doing most
of the time was using music for
decreasing pain decreasing anxiety
um kind of providing that additional
emotional support
um that people often don't get
especially when they're going through
something that is you know potentially
like traumatic and scary for them like
being in the hospital
um and you know we worked really closely
with
our like hospice and palliative care
team
um so a lot of folks who are going
through kind of the end of life process
um
and yeah that's kind of what my my daily
life was like
yeah and and I think that's important to
realize because one of the tips that we
that we talk about throughout the data
analytics accelerator is can we find you
a stepping stone job right because
you're new to this world of of data
right you're you're new to this world of
data you had no prior you know math jobs
or science jobs right it was the music
stuff right
um but you were able to land this this
financial analyst role pretty quickly
like within within about 90 days I was
looking I was trying to find our exact
when you told me you had the interview
and you had the offer
um and when you joined you joined like
right before Christmas and then I think
you started working like mid-march right
yes yeah
um so I
I like you know signed up
um clicked submit or whatever on the
accelerator package like right before
Christmas
um started actually like doing the
program right after Christmas like the
week before Christmas and New Year's
um and I I think my job the interview
was on March 1st
um which was a Wednesday or whatever the
Wednesday was that week and then that
Friday I accepted my offer
um so yeah I was uh not expecting that
um that's not even that's not even 60
days because February is not even 30
days right so that's basically yeah so
that's awesome
um and absolutely incredible
congratulations I cut you off keep
talking us through that to that Journey
yeah so
um I should back up and say that part of
what I was doing
um before kind of getting into the into
the accelerated boot camp
um you know when I
was looking into data analytics as a
potential you know career move
um I did kind of what anybody does and
just Googled it and landed on the Google
the Coursera like Google data analytics
program
um and I was doing that for a while I
think I started that sometime in the
summer
um last year
felt
um like I was understanding things
um I didn't I didn't have any you know
foundational knowledge besides like
using Excel for budgeting
um and you know I think it was a really
good introduction into like
what is data analytics and all of that
sort of thing but I didn't
um I made it like three quarters of the
way through but I didn't feel like I
could like actually apply my knowledge
in a way that was
um helpful for me I was like
understanding it as I was going through
but there wasn't a lot of like
there weren't any steps after that so
um I was looking for something that was
just more Hands-On and more like active
for me
um that's how I tend to learn best and
so I was you know just kind of looking
to see what was out there and
um I think I think you had a sale going
on I saw on LinkedIn and I was like that
sounds good
um you know most boot camps are like
five grand plus and you know that's not
something that in my previous job that I
could
even consider budgeting for
um in any kind of you know
uh reasonable timeline for wanting to
make a career move so
um I was like sounds great this guy's
cool I'm gonna just do this and see
where it goes
um and so from there that's kind of when
I uh
started like doing doing the analytics
accelerator boot camp
um and the curriculum and I think it
that is what really made a big
difference for me
yeah I I think I think your story is you
know very similar in fact someone
emailed me today and said you know how
is your program different than the
Google data cert um which is which is a
common question
um and I think I think you kind of
nailed it like actually applying what
were what you've learned right
um and then really focusing on creating
the projects and the networking right
because at the end of the day if you
don't have the projects you don't have
the network it's a lot harder to land
that job and then also just doing it
kind of with someone like someone that's
able to you know talk to you I know you
were pretty active on our community so
having all the peers around you uh I
think I think that's pretty helpful for
for most people
um and the other thing you did really
well is and I mean I think this was
helpful you can tell me if I'm wrong
um but you were trying to land a data
job you know you don't have necessarily
the what people would consider the
traditional or the ideal background I
don't think there is a traditional or
ideal background for data analytics but
that's that's besides the point
um but you found this job inside of
healthcare and you have been working in
healthcare as this music therapist
you've been visiting hospitals like you
said you know hospitals speak a little
bit like the acronyms and stuff like
that did that play a role in helping you
land this job like was that helpful to
know the hospital stuff
yeah I think so
um you know especially
during my interview process that was
something that I spoke to a lot
um you know and having kind of that
background knowledge of just
how the industry Works
um and understanding like yeah I might
not know like the back end of health
insurance but I know like
what these things mean and I know you
know kind of why things are set up the
way that they are
um even if I don't know the details of
like
how
how it works on the back end
um and one of the projects I think that
really helped me kind of be able to
speak to that was the SQL project
um in the accelerator the healthcare
analysis that was something that I
talked about in all of the interviews
that I had
um and they were really really
interested to know you know not only to
see that I had some SQL skills but also
just to see like
that I had used my prior knowledge and
like
um how I had applied that understanding
of the industry to the analysis like
with SQL
um so that I think was really really
helpful for me
um
yeah in that whole interview process
gosh I actually I mean I should have
realized that but I didn't even I didn't
even realize that and that's so cool
because they're like hey we're hiring
for a financial data analyst role the
the hope is that someone will understand
data analytics they'll understand SQL
and they'll they'll understand hospital
or I guess Healthcare data and you were
like oh well here's a project I've done
that you can read where I analyzed I
can't remember how much data is in that
one like 1.6 million rows of Hospital
data and like looked at outcomes and
like looked at like what procedures led
to these different things and how race
played and role in the hospital and
stuff like that and you're like just
here you go this is this is my evidence
right are you interested all right that
must have been really powerful for the
recruiter they're like oh wow uh SQL
projects with Healthcare data I'm sure
they didn't have very many other
projects like that if I were to guess I
don't know but if I were to guess
I don't know who else applied but
apparently I did something right so yeah
because because you interviewed and then
like three days later had an offer
yeah yeah that's amazing that's so
amazing congrats thank you
um
what one of the things I just wanna I
wanna highlight um that makes me so
happy to hear because when I was
designing the the analytics accelerator
I was like okay we have to do projects
and to be perfectly honest uh when I
first got into helping people land data
jobs I had the same philosophy that
projects were the way
but I had a little bit of a Different
Twist where I was like projects should
be fun it's always fun to do your own
personal data so when I originally
launched my boot camp all of the
projects were actually from your own
life like your own screen time on your
phone the data the the music you listen
to you know and stuff like that and that
those projects are really fun and I
think they're very impressive to
recruiters and hiring managers they were
a little bit harder because it's just
hard keep getting your own data but now
that we've transitioned to you know
using data from all the different
Industries I'm so happy to hear that we
when I was choosing the nine Industries
for the nine projects I was like man
there's so many Industries which ones do
we choose and I'm so glad to hear that
the healthcare and the sequel combo was
at least useful for one person that's so
good yes yes
for sure
um and actually I think
just having the projects in general and
having the specific
um
like specific tools for a specific
project
um I think was really really helpful
um and you know maybe just also to
highlight
another aspect of the boot camp
um I think the difference for me I was
applying to things
um kind of you know throughout the whole
uh the time that I was you know doing
all the modules
um and I wasn't really getting a lot of
bites and you know kind of trying to
Network and and get referrals for for
jobs but
um I think the thing that made the
difference was having I went to one of
your
um I don't remember if it was a live
session or just a module but um all
about resumes and like optimizing your
resume
um and so I added like literally as I
was watching I was like okay I'm gonna
add these links to my portfolio projects
I'm going to add you know a blurb about
what I learned what I analyzed what I
want and why
um and what I found
um and I like sent off a round of of
applications kind of with that new
resume with my projects added like an
actual section not just a link to my
um
to my portfolio site
and I like literally had three
interviews lined up for like that same
week
from just that difference
um and that was you know one of the one
of those interviews that I had is the
role that I ended up accepting so and
yeah did you did you apply to that job
or did they find you
so I applied for it
um I have I know several people that
also work for Humana and I had someone
who was willing to let me be a um or be
you know my referral
um so definitely worked kind of with my
network and and connecting with people
um to get my in
um human is a company that I have you
know
uh considered working for for a long
time
um and you know I know just from having
those personal uh relationships with
people here
um that they're they treat their
employees really well and so I was like
oh yeah that's like a company I really
want to work for so
um that's kind of how I was focusing my
my networking attention
um
but yeah I had very very quick
turnaround from submitting those
applications to hearing from recruiters
for the the specific positions okay
there's a lot there I want to unpack
um number one did you apply on like
LinkedIn jobs Indeed or on their website
on their website
um so I found them on LinkedIn but I
went to the website to apply okay um
yeah okay two
um one of the things I wanna I wanna
highlight here is
um I don't know if you remember this but
the job the job description
it probably said hybrid on the job
description do you think or do you say
okay and I want to highlight that
because I've no this is like a super
underrated play that everyone is
sleeping on right now and that's the
idea of hybrid jobs everyone is like oh
I don't want to be in person right so
they they go and they go to LinkedIn
jobs they use the Boolean search for
remote and they're competing with
literally thousands of other people for
these remote jobs because literally you
can be all over the us or the world
right and be an applicant for this job
but like your role you're in the office
like what eight hours a week on
Wednesday like if you want to like you
know work from home from you know the
rest of the days you can if you want to
I don't know humana's exact policy but
let's just say you want to go visit your
your parents or I don't know your
brother right you could you could go you
could leave Wednesday night and come
back home you know Tuesday night like
that's like a week that you could be
working somewhere else like you're not
quite remote but you're 90 there right I
guess I guess literally 75 right or what
what 80 there um yeah 80 yes but it's
but it's pretty good right
yeah and and like I said I am a really
extroverted person so I really like you
know I I think we get less done on
Wednesdays than we do like when we're
all remote
um you know because we're catching up
with each other and uh you know
socializing a little bit
um but yeah we have my team has a lot of
freedom outside of those those uh
in-person days and you know if you do
need to take a a remote day that's also
fine
um you know I had a co-worker yesterday
who was like yeah I just I'm not feeling
super well not well enough to not work
but can I just stay home today and my
team was like yeah of course just call
into the meeting that we have and we'll
be fine
um so there's a lot of flexibility there
and that's and that's awesome and I
think people are like no I only want a
remote job but the hard thing is like
when you're doing a remote job you're
competing with people you know not only
in Louisville right you're commuting
people all over the country but if
you're hybrid that job pool that they're
selecting from the Canada pool is so
much smaller and so you can stand out so
much more as a candidate
um the third thing I want to mention is
you know you mentioned the referral and
people are going to be like well okay I
don't know anyone you know I don't No
One's Gonna refer me but the people that
referred you what what part of the
company do they work for
not mine
um yeah it's uh
there are several organizations kind of
within Humana
um and they are in one that is parallel
with mine but they are not in finance at
all
um and so you know
they I even asked her she she like
looked into some of the jobs when I was
talking with her and she was like yeah I
don't know these higher
um but I know this person who
um you know worked with this other
person you know she kind of connected
some dots but she I didn't know
she didn't know anyone personally who
was like in charge of hiring or you know
the next like three steps up
um from my manager so
um
yeah I think it's a powerful thing to
even if you aren't if you can get a
referral from someone
um even if they aren't directly involved
with the position that you're applying
for I think it's really really worth it
to try to you know still build those
relationships and um and see if they can
help you out
Yeah a hundred percent like when I'm
working with a lot of people they're
like Avery I don't know anyone to get
referrals and the answer to that is bull
crap unless you're like you're brand new
to the country and you've never like you
don't speak English or like you haven't
really met people like you at least know
someone who works somewhere and
sometimes sometimes sometimes that
person's gonna work uh like as a grocer
at like at like Smith's family Grocery
and like that's not going to be useful
but like you've probably have at least
you know 20 contacts in your phone like
open up your phone and go through one by
one and just be like okay Paul Adams
where does he work Alejandra okra Lund
where does he work Paul Alstrom where
does he work you know and think through
do these people work for a company that
have an opening for a data analyst yes
or no and if they do it doesn't matter
if they're in marketing or if they're in
sales or if they're you know really
doesn't really matter because the
company just wants to kind of hire good
people and if that person's at that
company that's probably because they
think that person's a good person and so
if that person has a friend that's
probably also another good person and so
just having any sort of referral from
any company employee I think is worth
exploring and I think it gives you a leg
up in the application so I think a job
well done from you because you went for
the hybrid you went for the referral and
I mean that's what allows you to you
know do an interview and then bam you
have an offer like two days later mm-hmm
yeah it was uh it wasn't a short process
you know from uh starting getting into
Data at all to
um you know accepting a job offer but I
think
um the the
steps that I took in the last you know
couple of months of that Journey
um really really made the difference and
um yeah a lot of it was kind of prompted
by the accelerator program so thank you
for that yeah of course for I'm so glad
it worked out for you
um okay before we let you go I ask you a
few more questions about the interview
was it was it technical
no
um
and maybe part of it was because I had
projects to kind of show what I knew
um but we didn't there wasn't like an
assessment for me
um for any of the jobs that I
interviewed for you know kind of in that
round of interviewing
um
I talked about my projects a lot they
asked questions about the projects
themselves and kind of specifically and
I like the projects you had done
yes yeah so
um the the healthcare one um I talked
about
um oh I forget which is which now but um
I talked about the I think Massachusetts
education one
um I talked about that one I talked a
little bit about the data visualization
one that I had on my portfolio but
um yeah I like they would ask me
specific questions about you know like
what was your process with this what did
you know how did you come to this
conclusion based on this data and
um things like that rather than like you
know here is
a data set can you query this like I
didn't have to do any of that like
really really technical stuff I think
because they could see that I knew you
know how to at least do a select from
where statement and then they could ask
me those deeper level questions
um yeah based on my portfolio I think
that's so powerful because one of the
things we talk about in daa is the a lot
of times the people interviewing you are
busy people and they don't want to be
interviewing you and so they're coming
in with questions five minutes before
they're actually doing the interview
that's not true of everyone but a lot of
times I've I've hired people and I know
that I've done that before and so
sometimes if you give them projects all
of a sudden you just gave them material
for them to ask you questions about and
you kind of flipped the interview where
you're you've almost made the interview
about stuff that you know and stuff that
you've done versus them just like
randomly asking you questions
um
which I think is really it makes it way
less nerve-wracking and it makes you
look more impressive so I think I think
that's a win-win so overall you felt
prepared and it was just the one
interview
uh yes yes so for the role that I had
um it was in person
um which was helpful for me
um because I I tend to do really well
when I'm talking to people and feel less
nervous than you know if I'm
um
if it's like a phone interview or
something like that
um but we did it was one day
um but interviews with several people on
the team
um but we had really similar
conversations kind of between that
um as pertains to kind of their role and
and the difference between the role that
they're hiring for
um but yeah I felt really prepared I
felt
um like I knew
what I was talking about kind of going
in I obviously had done these whole
projects and could speak on them
um and so that made me feel really
confident in my skills and also in my
like you know presence and and
being able to really engage with them
instead of being worried about you know
am I gonna remember how to
like what the syntax is for this you
know specific thing that they're gonna
ask me about
yeah that's that's awesome
um I love that the project Springs
confidence that's an important takeaway
um yeah okay and then uh we did have a
question here um you can answer this to
your heart's content um as much as you
do or not um but the question is did you
feel the need to negotiate or were you
pretty happy uh with your offer
so
um as I mentioned I had interviews for
three different roles
um kind of you know all at the same time
um it was that like last round of
applications that I sent in after
changing my resume
um had all those interviews within you
know that same week the um the ones on
that Wednesday were the last ones
um and
a the recruiter contacted me
um and actually said that I had
um gotten offers from all three and that
they wanted to that they wanted to um
you know see what was my preference and
that sort of thing and I
didn't negotiate with numbers
necessarily but I said that a
um salary would put play A A Part in my
decision of which role to take
um and so I asked if they could give me
you know a range for each one
um so they came back with that and
um you know told me the ranges of what
what they could offer for each role
um and then I was really happy that the
the one that I had wanted the most did
actually have you know the highest offer
as well the highest range um and so I
you know happily took that one
um so I didn't have to necessarily
negotiate
um and then when I like accepted that
offer they
um said it was going to be the the
highest end of the
of the range they'd given me they just
gave me that top number
um so you got what you wanted exactly
yeah I didn't have to like you know
negotiate like face to face with
somebody but
um you know letting them know that that
was an important part of my decision I I
think that's good
um we you know a lot of people will talk
about negotiating
um and I think I'm probably not the the
best teacher of negotiation if I'm being
honest I've never really negotiated that
much but so many students in our program
have just been so happy with the offer
that they get that I mean is always
probably a good idea uh but anyways a
lot of people have just been super happy
that they're like I'll take it I'm so so
stoked with this right someone offered
me 10 million dollars right now to go
work for them I'm not negotiating I've
taken the 10 million dollars right and
and I mean uh kind of the same idea
there
um okay so we'll end with this uh any
advice that you'd like to give to people
with non-traditional backgrounds people
with
um maybe music backgrounds what what
would you say and that helped you and
your journey or what what advice would
you give them
mobile advice is to do projects um do
projects that are based on
skills that you have or you know the
industry that you have and then also
ones that show that you have knowledge
for where you want to go
um so if it's Healthcare if it's
um you know marketing like whatever
you're trying to kind of break into do
projects with that show that you know
how to use the technical skills
um in that
industry
um and then just in general I think
um something that I realized
through my journey
was that even if you are like just
starting and you don't really have a
whole lot of like foundational knowledge
um to go off of
you are
more capable and you know a lot more
than you think that you do
um you know everything transfers to
everything else
um I guarantee that there's something
that you like do in your daily job that
relates to you know your your data
analytics learning
um and I think that if you have started
on this journey and you know are
um even if you are at the beginning
you've done the hard part of like making
the decision and starting
um and so now it's just about
consistency and you know keeping that
going
I I love that I hope you guys listening
take that to heart keep in mind that was
a music therapist telling you that you
have something
in your current job that is relatable to
data analytics if you ask me like the
most opposite of a data analytics job
ever I might say a music therapist but
you're absolutely right Aaron that no
matter what you're doing you can relate
something to what you're currently doing
it is experience for a data analyst job
so you know don't be discouraged when
you see you know one to two years of
experience two to five years of
experience you have some sort of
experience that you can draw and I loved
the advice uh on doing projects so uh
Aaron thanks so much for being on the
show uh we'll have your LinkedIn Down
Below in the show notes so that people
can connect with you and uh just so
excited for you and your journey Aaron
thanks for sharing it with all of us
here
thanks so much for having me
yeah no problem
um okay great thanks everyone for
listening if you guys are listening live
on YouTube or LinkedIn uh we just want
to say hello to you guys
um also if you guys did not know I'm
doing a live version of the data
analytics accelerator
um starting on Monday and I want you
guys to be part of that
um awesome program we're going to be if
you guys are like I want some more
guidance I want some more Community
we're doing two hour live sessions every
Monday and then where I'm going to be
building the projects that Aaron talked
about we're going to build the SQL
Hospital project we're going to build uh
the doordash marketing project we're
going to build the education Tableau
project all together on those Monday
sessions and then we're doing a live
office hour on Thursday so if you're
interested you can go to
datacareerjumpstart.com
d-a-a or you can just send me a DM on
LinkedIn and I'll get you the stuff you
need so I just want to make sure you
guys know because that is an opportunity
that um haven't done before where I'm
actually building the projects and I'm
going live for three hours every week
with you guys so uh hopefully that's
that's pretty exciting
um great Aaron anything else
nope I don't think so thanks so much for
having me and uh good luck everybody
listening yeah sounds good all right bye
everyone

Title: I‚Äôve Taught 1,028 People Data Analytics (here‚Äôs what I‚Äôve Learned)

Description: Over the past 5 years, I‚Äôve taught 1000‚Äôs about data analytics.
What have I learned as a teacher?
Where have I seen the most success?
What‚Äôs the biggest secret to people who succeed? 

In this episode, I‚Äôll share it all :) 



Timestamps:
3:30 - Journey: Teaching data analytics full-time for the past year and a half. üìä
8:58 - Lesson: Skills alone aren't enough to land data jobs. üéì
13:06 - Focus: Guiding students to low-barrier, rewarding data positions. üîç
18:25 - Success: Marketing, portfolio, and networking are crucial for data job seekers. üåü


Video Transcript:
over the past three years I've had the
chance to teach thousands of people
about data analytics and data science
whether that's through my daily LinkedIn
and Instagram posts or it's through the
weekly YouTube and podcast episodes like
this or through my experience of
teaching at MIT or through my online
products at datacareerjumpstart.com I've
learned a whole heck of a lot about
being a data career coach about Landing
your first day to job what it takes the
data skills all that good stuff and in
this episode I'm going to give you my
top five takeaways from this whole
process about what it actually takes to
land your first day to job stay tuned
here we go welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job here's your host Avery Smith today's
episode is brought to you by my bootcamp
the data analytics accelerator it is an
all-inclusive boot camp to help you land
your First Data job we cover the skills
you need to know the network you need to
grow and of course the projects you need
to create by the end of the whole entire
process you'll have mastered Excel SQL
and Tableau and built nine different
projects on some beautiful portfolios
that will impress hiring managers and
recruiters we actually have something
pretty special going on right now if
you're listening to this where I'm going
to be doing a live version of the boot
camp so it's still all the rest of the
normal boot camp we still have the
pre-recorded videos we still have to go
at your own pace but every week I'm
going to hop on over the next 10 weeks
and build a live project with you from
the program I'm also going to be doing a
one hour live office hour every single
week so pretty dang good if you want
more information about it you can go
ahead and click the link in the
description down below to register
pretty exciting times I'm very excited
about it and I hope to see you guys
inside the program hey everyone welcome
back to the data career podcast if
you're new here my name is Avery Smith
and I'm a full-time data career coach
spending my days trying to help you land
your data job thank you so much for
listening I have some amazing news going
on this week it's absolutely incredible
we're up to 60 reviews on Apple podcasts
and 80 ratings on Spotify podcasts so
thank you guys so much if you guys
haven't subscribed consider subscribing
as a reminder the show is free to
everyone as long as you leave that
rating or review wherever you're
listening or if you hit subscribe on
YouTube that's what keeps the podcast
free and keeps me energized and going I
want to share a quick review that we got
on Apple podcast this week from jd1g
[Music]
amazing name I think that's a five-star
review and said inspiring thank you so
much for sharing and motivating and
inspiring stories I find the content
insightful and helpful keep it up so
thanks so much jd1g really appreciate it
I also want to tell you guys that we
have some really cool upcoming episodes
that are going to be awesome I've been
speaking to a lot of guests we're going
to have a real data analytics hiring
manager on the show and she's going to
talk through about what her last hiring
process she had hired a junior data
analyst why she chose the person she
chose you know what she liked in some
candidates what she didn't like so stay
tuned for that episode we're also going
to have some graduates of the data
analytics accelerator on the show who
have landed their day to job through my
boot camp they'll be coming up in
upcoming episodes so we're back to some
guest episodes that I'm really excited
about and you should be excited as well
okay in today's episode I wanted to take
you back over the last few years and go
through my journey teaching data
analytics it's been absolutely
incredible the last two and and a half
years I've pretty much been able to do
this near full time the last year and a
half has really been full time of just
pure teaching but even before I quit my
job at Exxon I was doing some teaching
as well and so I'll kind of go through
my journey as a data analytics teacher
and what I have learned teaching you
about data analytics what have I learned
how have I changed as a teacher in order
to help serve you better so just a
little bit of a brief history about my
data analytics teaching Journey because
you guys have probably heard my story
about how I went from a chemical lab
technician to you know a data analyst
and then data scientist and then
starting my own data analytics firm and
all that good stuff but not a whole lot
of people know the story of how I became
a teacher a career coach so it actually
all started when I was doing undergrad
research when I was doing undergrad
research inside the chemical engineering
department I had a really amazing Mentor
my my professor Cody Powell Dr Cody
Powell and we were doing machine
learning and cool data stuff
with chemical engineering and so it was
pretty pretty cool like a combo right to
do chemical engineering and data science
and analytics at the same time and not
too many people at the University were
really doing that and so she actually
asked me to come in and kind of explain
to the other researchers in that
organization what I was doing and how I
was doing it and what type of you know
programming was I using what type of
math was I using and stuff like that so
that's probably where the first time I
actually publicly started teaching data
science and analytics and that actually
continued throughout my job when I
worked at Vapor sense the biotech
startup I was making a lot of really
cool tools that would help us do some
Automation and data analysis space do
some dashboards some reports some graph
stuff like that and I would show my
other chemical lab technicians hey this
is how you use this graph this is what
this you know this is what this chart
does so I was kind of teaching on the
job there as well but my first formal
position of teaching data science and
analytics happened while I was at Exxon
similarly there were some other times
where I was teaching colleagues on how
to do do things in some small groups but
eventually my boss was like wow you like
to teach a lot and you're actually
pretty good at it would you like more of
a formal role teaching and I was like
yeah I would love that and so I actually
was in charge of an analytics interest
group and so basically what this is a
company-wide I guess it was only really
a U.S wide organization that I was in
charge of uh North America because
Canada was involved as well where we
would meet twice a month and we
basically would learn something new
about analytics every single month and
so I was in charge of this sometimes I
was doing the teaching sometimes I bring
in guests and they would be doing the
teaching not dissimilar to what we do
with data analytics accelerator now
sometimes you know I'm teaching a lot of
the data analyst accelerator but
sometimes we have guests come to guest
lectures and stuff like that and I
started teaching there and it was
awesome because I was teaching engineers
and accountants and Business Development
folks so people who didn't necessarily
have data or Tech backgrounds how they
could actually use data in their current
role because that's one thing I really I
want to emphasize you do not have to be
a data analyst or data scientist to be
doing data analytics if you are solving
business problems with the use of data
that's all data analytics entails and of
course there's some certain ways that we
can do it better than others but I want
to be very inclusive in this whole
process and that's my definition of
doing data analytics so that's where I
first started teaching was at Exxon in
this you know this uh or North America
role of the lead analytics interest
Network and that was really fun I really
enjoyed that after I quit my job one of
the first things I wanted to do is teach
more and so I actually started a one
week live data science boot camp and I
was teaching this so I advertised on my
LinkedIn I think at the time it costs
somewhere between 100 and 150 and that
got you access to 10 hours of live
lectures with me which is absolutely
Bonkers because basically it was just
really hard to keep up with that it was
a lot of attention and not a whole lot
of income coming from but I loved it it
was really fun so so we maybe had 20
people and for one week straight all I
did was focus on teaching this boot camp
so I basically would make the lectures
in the morning I would do two hours of
lecture live at night I would send out
the slides the reminders all that stuff
and then do the same thing the next day
we did that for five days in a row and
what did I learn from that I learned
that I didn't really have a method at
the time I knew how I broke into data
analytics I knew some of my friends
broken data analytics but I really
didn't know that much when I was
teaching that I was you know I was
teaching them what the importance of
data science is what data science is how
you can get started with it we started
even doing some data science with python
at the time but this is my first time
actually teaching people from scratch
consecutively right because you know at
Exxon I was teaching people twice a
month but those people were part of my
Corporation you know we were trying to
help them use data with what they were
doing we were familiar with what
business unit they were in an axon right
and this was a collection of 20 very
awesome people but I didn't know
anything about them right and didn't
know where they were working they were
all working in different Industries so
it was really hard to teach general
information to this group and so was it
the best boot camp ever I mean it was a
pretty good deal for the price and
everything like that but I definitely
wasn't my best teaching performance and
I've really grown since then you know
and one thing I didn't focus on when I
did this boot camp was actually getting
the job right we all love data we love
math you wouldn't be listening to this
podcast if that wasn't the case but I'm
guessing that most of you guys don't do
it for fun right you probably do it for
a career and that's awesome that's I
think we should have hobbies outside of
work and I love data I love doing it for
fun sometimes but I also love playing
the new Zelda tears of the Kingdom game
I love running I love weightlifting I
love spending time with my new born
daughter my dog my wife I like to golf I
love my extended family you know I don't
necessarily do data analytics for
enjoyment's sake I do it because it pays
the bills right and that's fine it's an
amazing career it's in my opinion the
best career that there is but it's okay
to realize hey this is a career and so
we don't want to be doing data analytics
for data analytics sake right we want to
do it to land a job so in that first
session that first boot camp I ran I
actually never even talked about getting
a data job it was all about the skills
but what you've come to know if you've
listened to this podcast before is what
I've learned now is the skills is only
about a third of the equation for
actually Landing your First Data job you
not only need the skills but you also
need a network and you also need a
portfolio and that's really important I
didn't even touch on that at all in that
first boot camp but it was a really good
experience I think people really enjoyed
it and I think they learned a lot from
it as well so after that I was really
excited to to be more of a teacher and
so I ended up starting data career
jumpstart later that year and I ran a
program a boot camp some of you guys may
have been part of it called Data career
jumpstart with my Flagship program and
boy oh boy did I learn a lot doing that
it was basically the ultimate data
science bootcamp it's not dissimilar
from data analytics accelerator it's
pretty dang similar in fact much of the
curriculum is the same but there's one
big difference that I realized at the
time I was teaching people to land like
pretty sweet data science positions we
did a really awesome data science
project we were really focused on you
know okay here's all the stuff you need
to know about machine learning but
people were really struggling to land
jobs and I was like man why is that the
case and a lot of times it was because
they weren't getting very far in the
program they weren't making it very far
and I realized that there's actually
when I looked at the people who were
Landing jobs and what type of jobs they
were landing and what the pay was I
realized man people are actually Landing
very sweet jobs that don't require any
programming or any machine learning and
I was like we should probably just focus
more on that because that's what's
actually getting results and so in data
crew jumpstart we touched on machine
learning we touched on programming
heavily with python we touched on you
know how to do Predictive Analytics
extensively and I came to realize that
you know what people can learn that on
the job you know let's just get people
what I call a stepping stone job let's
get your foot in the door get the First
Data title on your resume and once you
get that First Data title life becomes
so much easier your second job is easier
to get your third job is easier you get
your fourth drop is easier to get and
you could upskill from there right there
is so many different things in the data
world that you could learn in fact I
think I saw a stat the other day it's
like 1460 or something like that that's
how many different data programming
tools softwares all that good stuff that
you could possibly learn on your journey
and so much stuff
you will not learn all of that in your
lifetime it's impossible so stop trying
right instead let's focus on and I and
we ended up choosing Excel SQL and
Tableau because those are the three most
in-demandated skills that there are it's
proved backed by data analysis shout out
to Luke Bruce who has a really awesome
uh dashboard that shows what the latest
you know requirements are backed by data
and Dustin sheimick and his data jobs
report those two reports both say SQL
learn that Excel learn that Tableau
learn that now of course some jobs are
going to require python but we don't
necessarily need to go for those jobs
and when even if we do Learn Python we
don't have to master it right and so I
really learned the importance of let's
get people into stepping stone jobs
where we can get those jobs quickly in
less than 90 days you know my LinkedIn
tagline right now is I help people land
data jobs in 90 days and a lot of people
give me grief Avery it's impossible land
day job in 90 days it's not you guys
it's possible is it hard yeah it's hard
and it's it especially is hard if you're
going after what I call the castle job
it's like the most beautiful amazing
you're saving the world with data
science job those jobs are really cool
very cool job hard to get competitive
High barriers instead what I try to do
is help my students get low-level jobs
low barrier to entry jobs they still pay
great they still are remote they're
still flexible they're still fun they're
still data jobs but they're not like I'm
using neural Nets to you know solve
cancer type jobs
those are great jobs too but they're
harder to get and so what I'm really
focused on in the data accelerator after
you know teaching at the boot camp after
doing data career jumpstart I realized
man what is actually getting people jobs
what is actually working what what does
the data say about Landing your First
Data job and the data told me my own
personal data said hey you got to be
focused more on on getting that entry
level job you know machine learning is
awesome it's cool but for your first job
it's not necessary
that was one of the biggest lessons I
took away is like man machine learning
is awesome it takes a while to learn
there's a lot of math there's a lot of
programming that goes into it but
actually Excel SQL Tableau aren't that
hard to learn we can learn those three
quickly get an entry level job and then
you can learn machine learning on that
job right you can get paid to learn the
rest and that's what we try to focus on
inside the data accelerator now is how
do we get you that first job as quickly
as possible where you're getting a pay
increase you're getting a flexible
lifestyle you're able to work remotely
those types of things you're able to
enjoy what you do and you can actually
get in a program that's going to pay you
to learn whatever you want to learn you
know web scraping or you know Predictive
Analytics or clustering or whatever it
is get paid to learn on the job at the
stepping stone job and then you'll
eventually read the castle that's what I
learned doing data crew jumpstart and
then I started working for MIT and
teaching data MIT I basically was the
live Professor so there was actually
like MIT professors who did all of the
lessons and the lectures I was just
video recordings of them and I was kind
of their mouthpiece if you had a
question you'd ask me and what I learned
quickly as kind of their mouthpiece was
the importance of keeping your material
fresh they record these videos and then
they never really changed them and the
issue is with data things are changing
so quickly so actually when I built the
data analytic accelerator I really
focused and built it in a way where I
could Implement new things quickly so if
new technology came out we could
implement it if I learned something new
about the LinkedIn algorithm we can add
it right and that's one thing that was
really a struggled with MIT because it
was like if something new comes out it
was a pain in the butt month-long
process to get it fixed uploaded and you
know renewed you and now it's data
accelerator we do it very quickly for
example if you're inside the data
analyst accelerator you might know kind
of what I'm talking about one of the
reasons or one of the first things that
we'll do in module let's see one two
three four is start to use SQL we learn
in module one's introduction module two
we do a data analysis project with Excel
module three we do a data analysis
project with Tableau and then module
four we start with the with SQL project
and one of the struggles of using SQL is
it's actually kind of twofold a lot of
online programs a lot of you use SQL but
they'll load your data for you and they
give you kind of the the SQL interface
for you to use and so that's not
realistic because in real life no one's
ever going to just give you the data in
SQL no one's ever going to just give you
this magical box that magically works
you have to do some setup on your own
now some it places might be nicer than
others and have you know have that built
out for you but it's getting started
with SQL is harder than actually the
syntax it's actually just getting the
system to use SQL up that's actually a
big problem so I don't want that to be a
problem at the beginning so at the
beginning I give everyone an easy way to
use SQL online inside of your browser
you upload your data yourself but then
you're using SQL in your browser no
downloads no installations no software
those types of things it's all
browser-based and the system I was using
was such a cool system it was called
bit.io and unfortunately it just got
bought and that's what happened in the
data world right these software
companies get bigger and bigger and
start buying other ones so we got bought
uh by data bricks and they were no
longer offering the the product that we
were using for free so all of a sudden I
had to change what I was doing right
because I was using the latest
technology latest technology got bought
now we have to switch what we're doing
so now we're using something called
csvfiddle.com or dot IO all of you guys
can go check it out that's what we teach
instead of daily accelerator it's just
basically a browser-based SQL thing but
I had to make that transition on the Fly
and it was quick we did it about two
weeks got that done from when we we knew
it was about to shut down to find a new
tool making sure it all worked so that's
one thing that I really tried to do
inside the data like silver that was not
at MIT is are we agile can we add new
things take things from the curriculum
you know give you guys the latest
information possible because the every
Edge that you have in your data journey
is going to be used to your advantage so
the more that you can actually get the
latest and greatest the more we want to
give that to you so that's one of the
things that I learned at MIT overall
through this process I've learned a
whole heck of a lot one of the things
that I've learned the biggest lesson I
guess I could say is it's not the most
talented people who land the jobs it's
not the smartest people it's not the
highest IQ people it's not the people if
I you know gave them a python assessment
or a SQL assessment they would perform
the best
it's not it's the people who were able
to perform technically but marketed and
packaged themselves well you know the
skills the S part of the ESPN method is
just one-third you also need the
portfolio you also need the network it
is a combination of all three I actually
attended a coaching conference not too
long ago in Austin Texas where I got to
hear from Ali abdal I don't know if you
guys have ever seen or heard from him
before he's a YouTuber he's actually the
world's leading productivity expert he
has 4.4 million subscribers on YouTube
and he talks about you know how to learn
how to be a better person he also talks
about how to grow on YouTube and he was
giving a lesson to all of us coaches at
this conference in Austin about how to
grow on YouTube and he said you know
what the best YouTubers you know people
like Mr Beast I like Mark Rober
they're not in the business of making
videos they're in the business of making
thumbnails in amazing titles with a
video that merely catches up to their
promise now if never made a YouTube
video before you're probably like what
the heck ever I don't even know what
you're saying but what Ali Abdallah was
saying was the best YouTubers the best
YouTube videos are not necessarily the
best videos they're the best package
with a title they Market themselves the
best they have the best thumbnail they
have the best title that is the most
important thing to the YouTube algorithm
and honestly it's kind of the same for
the job hiring algorithm there's not
actually like some greater algorithm
that you know rules everything in the
universe this is just generally speaking
that if you can Network your way to the
right positions work with recruiters
work with your old friends your peers
your co-workers whoever to find a
position foot in the door that's going
to be well for you if you can position
yourself to look good you have a good
resume you have a good LinkedIn profile
you you have a portfolio with lots of
projects you look good you're like wow
that person's impressive it's going to
serve you well and that's basically what
I've learned is there is not a direct
correlation to how skilled you are to
how easily you land a job there is a
little bit of a correlation but it is
not that strong instead your packaging
really matters and so I want to leave
that thought with you is how are you
packaging yourself do you have the right
Network do you have the right projects
do you have the right skills because you
really need all three to land that First
Data job if you're not sure where the
best place to get all three of those is
I would love to invite you to check out
the data analytic accelerator it is my
10 week boot camp that teaches you the
skills the project and the networking
necessary to land your First Data job if
you're listening to this in the month of
June we have something very special
going on where we're doing a live
version of this so over the next 10
weeks I'm going to be meeting with you
guys live to actually build the projects
answer any questions you have while
we're building the projects Together
live and then I'll also be doing an
office hour I will answer any questions
that you have about projects portfolios
skills networking whatever it's all open
and I'm happy to answer you can learn
more about the data analytics
accelerator by clicking the link in the
description down below I hope to see you
guys there the live starts on Monday
June 26th 2023 and I hope that you guys
will be part of it have a great week
everyone

Title: Underrated or Overrated with Shashank Kalanithi - AI, Power BI, Cold Messaging & More!

Description: What does data engineer @ShashankData  think about AI, Power BI & Cold Messaging? Watch to find out üëÜ

Subscribe to Shashank's Channel: https://www.youtube.com/@ShashankData




Video Transcript:
foreign
[Music]
welcome back to overrated and underrated
and I'm here with shashankalanathy and
what do you do I am a senior data
analyst at Nordstrom and I do YouTube on
the side okay sweet and where can people
find you they can find me on YouTube uh
Shashank column it's pretty hard to
spell so we'll leave in the description
below okay sounds good or you can guess
either way just kidding it'll be in the
description down below all right so I'm
gonna ask you a series of questions you
can say whether it's overrated
underrated or properly rated all right
we're going to start with the term AI
overrated very overrated
um I think it's because it's come to
Encompass a lot of things that it
actually isn't for a lot of people and
there is this idea that it can solve
issues that we fundamentally don't have
the data for or don't have like clean
enough data to you know fully solve that
being said as I was saying that I just
remembered gpt3 and how there's
um this uh someone made like a a version
of it that can create SQL queries for
you apparently with some you know pretty
amazing degree of accuracy so
um I will still probably say overrated
like in the context of broader Human
Society but underrated in certain very
uh Niche tasks all right fair enough how
about power bi power bi underrated
um a lot of people still a lot of people
get focused on AI and ML and uh when
their businesses aren't even doing basic
automated bi like a lot of your bi Works
should be automated uh and you should
have your you should have the ability
for directors and VPS to get reports
instantly and I actually argue the
directors and VP should know how to use
power bi or Tableau you know
um and I would especially say given that
power bi is able is is free and does
everything that Tableau does uh severely
underrated not on Mac though no not on
MacBook that is true it is it is not on
Mac but you know what kind of what
company of size doesn't have access to
PCS good point all right Panda Express
overrated or under it ooh Panda Express
and I properly rate it as something over
there too right yeah that's that's fair
within the groups of friends I hang out
with I would say properly rated where
it's like you know we're not going out
of our way to go to our Panda Express
but you know General sells chicken
orange chicken like it hits a spot uh at
certain times but you know we're
obviously not celebrating going to Panda
Express
all right sweet how about Marvel
Marvel uh
oh that is a difficult one overrated
from the perspective of anyone not
Finance directly financially involved
with Marvel if you're directly
financially involved with Marvel it is
underrated it is um it is insane how it
was able to basically that they're
making a billion dollars a movie you
know
um so from a financial perspective
underrated from uh like everything else
perspective completely overrated I
personally Iron Man the first one is
still my favorite Marvel movie like I
like small contained stories and the
original Iron Man was actually a great
critique of the American military
industrial complex complex while still
being a entertaining movie and I think
they lost that as the movies became more
of a spectacle than anything
all right fair enough how about
um linear regression
properly rated you know I I whenever the
number of memes I see that say uh
machine learning says it's machine
learning does linear regression kind of
goes to show that uh people are using it
a lot and any data science is worth
their soul types I would think would
start off with that you know when it
makes sense to use the problem and then
gradually increase the complexity of
their solution so I in my experience
properly writing okay I like it how
about the bar graph
severely underrated the bar graph is the
bar graph is the single greatest graph
ever created uh pie chart shouldn't
exist they have almost no use cases very
very few but almost none
um unless you're making a uh pun about a
bar graph of your favorite pies or a pie
chart of your favorite bars as a
percentage of Ops awesomeness so good
pie chart underrated for memes bar chart
and rated total yes yes almost
everything should be a bar chart they're
like they're I'm actually coming over
with a video soon where I go over the
different types of charts of what you
can do with them and at the end of the
day like most use cases can be solved
for the bar chart
all right I like it how about cold
messaging cold messaging like uh for
recruiting
for anything for anything uh severely
underrated it is uh it can be very
depressing to message someone and then
not receive a response
um but at the end of the day it's all
anyone who's not super well connected
has sometimes so severely underrated all
right last one
GitHub
underrated by data analysts
properly rated by everyone else uh in my
experience data analysts don't use
GitHub as much as they probably should
um or like fairly new data scientists
but uh again I don't think I'm about an
engineer that isn't you know regularly
committing to GitHub plus it's a great
tool to show companies consistency in
your work and the improvement over time
of your work so
properly rated in the workplace
underrated as a personal a tool of
personal Improvement there you go all
right sweet and uh any hot takes to end
it uh iPhones iPhones are severely
underrated the amount of work that goes
into making your iPhone that what it is
is enormously underrated at the end of
the day this is a Computing platform
right that came out of nowhere and it's
a Computing platform where Apple not
only owns the design they work
incredibly closely with the factories
they don't own the factors but they're
the biggest supplier other factories
which leads to them like having fewer
chips shortages than anyone else
um they designed their own chips and
that is a severely underrated thing for
a uh Hardware assembler to do you know
like a company like Samsung software
typically Hardware Samplers
um and the ability for them to optimize
whatever tasks they want to optimize
when they want to optimize them severely
underrated there you go thank you so
much had a great time thank you

Title: Will AI Replace Data Analysts?

Description: Will AI replace data analyst? Is it going to happen? Has it already happened?

In this episode, I wanted to dig into if I actually think that's going to be the case.



Timestamps:
00:43 - Brace yourself: AI has ARRIVED! ü§ñ
01:29 - Is your data analyst job in jeopardy? AI vs. Human Skills üíº
02:37 - The art of data analysis using AI üöÄ
03:12 - When math wizards met calculators üßÆ
03:44 - AI as your ultimate Google Searchüîì
05:38 - Future-proof your career by mastering üåü
07:01 - Human will make the decision, not AI‚ú®
07:43 - Level Up Your Data Game: Join the Ultimate Data Bootcamp! üìöüí™


Video Transcript:
will AI replace me as a data analyst
that is a question I've been getting a
lot of recently and in today's episode I
wanted to dig into if I actually think
that's going to be the case welcome to
the data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith once again
guys welcome back to the data career
podcast the number one podcast for your
Landing your First Data job I'm your
host Avery Smith and I run a company
called Data career jumpstart where I
help people land their first data job so
let's talk about this whole AI maybe
taking the place of data analysts is it
going to happen has it already happened
let's get into some thoughts alright so
AI is not coming it is here you guys
with revolutionary new products like
chat GPT gpt4 mid-journey it's very
clear that AI is all over the place but
what does that mean to you as someone
who is in the data world or trying to
land their first data job are you going
to be replaced for a career you're
trying so hard to work into and you
can't even break into yet is it going to
be obsolete I actually got a message on
LinkedIn this week that asks something
very similar they said that they've been
hearing more and more about Ai and
chatgpt4 I came across this newsletter
the other day that said that data
analysts might be replaced and I begin
to wonder about future job security for
junior data analysts like me simply
because this is moving so quickly I just
wondered what your thoughts were on this
so I thought I'd make this podcast
episode to kind of talk through what I
think about Chachi BT llms AI everything
in general is it coming for you my
answer is no my answer is no and the
reason is AI is just a tool you know we
really think of AI is really scary like
these robots that could potentially take
over the world and you know maybe it
will be that eventually but right now
all AI is is a hammer it still needs the
human to actually do something now there
are really cool things like Auto GPT if
you've never heard of that before pause
the podcast you can look it up I'm not
the most well versed on it so I'm not
going to try to explain it in depth in
this episode but basically it's like
where you have multiple AI agents so
imagine chat GPT talking to another chat
GPT which is talking to another chat GPT
and it can basically instead of having a
human talk to Chachi PT it's Chachi PT
talking to chat GPT and it becomes a
little bit more autonomous I think
there's another one called Auto GPT as
well and these are basically talking
back and forth to one another a little
bit more autonomously so it is like
maybe becoming more of a self-propelling
tool but for the most part AI is just a
tool it's just like a hammer it's like a
saw you still need a human to operate it
so will our tasks change as data
analysts and data practitioners yes
probably as they always have I mean
imagine the data analysts before
computers were invented imagine what
they would be doing would be a lot
different than what we'll be doing today
you know for example they'd be doing a
lot of hand calculations they'd be using
that like the Abacus right to keep track
of all these different things and now we
have Excel now we have SQL those are
tools that did not exist did you know
these people who these mathematicians
did they lose their job when Excel came
out no did their job nature change yes
probably they probably started having to
use the tool so in my opinion this is
just a hammer and everyone should start
using the hammer there's no reason
whether you're trying to land your First
Data job or whether you're an
experienced data professional that you
should not be using some form of AI you
need to be otherwise you're going to get
left with the times this is a new tool
it's going to be revolutionary and you
should feel enabled in fact you should
feel emboldened by this because all of a
sudden the barrier to break into data
analytics has even dropped a little bit
further because a lot of the technical
requirements can be fulfilled with chat
GPT and Ai and what I mean by that is
it's basically all Chachi PT and AI
really is is a more effective Google
right like in the past if you didn't
know how to do something in SQL you
could Google it and within a few clicks
you could probably find your answer
Chachi PT is a more effective Google and
I'm not even going to say more effective
I'm going to say say faster but it's not
necessarily guaranteed to be right 100
of the time so you do have to be a
little bit concerned and worried about
that but really we've been doing this
for years we've been posting stuff and
questions on stack Overflow and getting
help we've been Googling stuff finding
different errors and finding the answer
inside of Google so really what I see
chat gbt is coming into play is it's
just going to make us more effective
it's a tool that's going to make us more
effective and for you as someone who
wants to break into the data world you
should feel really excited because now
it's going to be a little bit easier to
break into the field you don't have to
be memorizing all of SQL you don't have
to you know memorize all this different
statistic stuff you can ask chat GPT and
pretty reliably get an answer right but
that is a little bit scary because they
were thinking well that makes me
obsolete but once again a tool has to be
wielded by a human and humans are really
good at knowing when we should do tasks
how we should do those tasks and what
those tasks should be now we can use AI
to kind of expedite that whole journey
the whole process but it still requires
a good human brain to link the business
to the AI will that be the case in the
future I think so will chat GPT and AI
get better and need humans less probably
but until that happens let's not fret
what's going to happen at midnight when
it's only 9 A.M right and we can get
good at using AI we can get good at
using chatgpt today and then we're gonna
have job security so AI will not take
your job but a human that uses AI might
and so to be future proof all you need
to be is a human that knows how to use
AI really well and what does that mean
for you like what can you do today to
get good at that I think you just go on
to chat EBT and start playing around
start trying to ask different questions
you know try to ask different SQL
questions or different python questions
or maybe even some Excel questions and
just start messing around all right you
can kind of get a feel for what it can
do and what it can't do what some
limitations are but don't be worried
about it if you have never opened it up
before if you've never tried doing data
analytics on it don't fret there's some
tasks that Chachi BT is fantastic for
and there's other tasks that chat gbt is
actually not very good at for instance
it's obviously not going to take the job
in any sort of large number arithmetic
now computers are better at humans
adding if we can tell the computer what
we need but that brings me to my next
point is that the bridge between the
tech and the domain or the tech in the
business is still going to be largely
covered by humans humans are more
capable to see what's going on in the
real world and relate it to math related
to statistics related to data and make
those connections and also make those
choices right because at the end of the
day humans most of society is still a
human decision made society we're making
business decisions you know even when I
was at Exxon Mobil when we had AI tools
they weren't really AI they were very
data sciencey machine learning tools it
would suggest stuff but it's still down
to the human to make those decisions
overall because once again it's a tool
it's not going to replace US unless we
don't use it at all so I encourage all
of you guys to go play with chat GPT go
test for yourself go try it out don't be
afraid of it it's going to be okay your
job's not going anywhere and life's
going to continue on that being said if
you want help in your data Journey
Landing that First Data job hit me up I
run a program called data analytics
accelerator it's a 10-week bootcamp that
will help you land your First Data job
by helping you build nine portfolio
projects learning the most important
skills and teaching you how to network
effectively with recruiters hiring
managers and peers so that you can land
that data job fast if you're interested
in that you can click on the link down
below once again thank you guys for
listening to the show see you soon

Title: The Easiest Place to Land Your First Data Job

Description: Your dream data job might be closer than you realise.

Don't overlook the hidden gem right before you: internal positions.

Landing an internal job is easier than going through the external route.

üåü¬†Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club



Timestamps:
0:00 - The Best Place to Land Your First Job
1:35 - How I Landed My First Data Job
6:08 - Your Company Has a Data Team?
9:39 - Network inside your company
11:31 - Use data at your current position
13:18 - Attend data events 


Video Transcript:
if you're looking for your first data
job you might not even realize it but it
might be right in front of you and
you're just not seeing it let me explain
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith welcome
everyone to another episode of the data
career podcast the first thing I want to
say is we have a special guest on the
podcast today she is right here you
cannot see her but you might be able to
hear her depending on how it goes but my
new daughter Penelope is in the room
with me right behind me and she's asleep
right now looking like a little angel
but if you hear any peeps that's what
you're hearing is Penelope talking but
she's asleep so she probably won't talk
too much alright so if you're trying to
land that first day to job you're trying
to look everywhere for that job but it
might actually be right in front of you
let me explain so like one of the first
things that we do when you join the data
analytics accelerator which is my
10-week boot camp to help you land your
first day to job in less than 90 days is
you'll decide if you're trying to go for
an internal pivot or an external pivot
and what that is are you going to try
and find a job internal to your company
or external to your company lots of
people think that they have to find a
job externally they're looking at these
different tech companies maybe Facebook
or Amazon or Google or whatever right
they're like I need a new job and so I
need to switch companies that's not
actually the case if you guys remember
my story or if you ever heard my story
you'll know that I actually did an
internal pivot and internal pivots are
often easier and often better than
external pivots I'll do a quick little
summarization of my story I was a
chemical lab technician which basically
meant I mixed chemicals every day I wear
a lab coat and I worked for this company
that basically built these sensors that
would sniff the air they'd be able to
tell you what chemicals were in the air
if there was a bomb nearby if there was
alcohol nearby if there was drugs nearby
it would be able to detect and they
actually had a data scientist at the
company who wrote the algorithms to be
able to decipher what was in the air and
and the data scientists ended up leaving
the company and I was a chemical lab
technician we tried to hire a data
person for a long time and what you
might not know is hiring people is
actually really expensive because it
costs to list your job on things like
LinkedIn or zip recruiter that costs
money that's like a service and on top
of that you usually want to get the best
candidates possible and so you're
sponsoring those posts so they get to
the right people or you're boosting them
in some way so that the right people see
it and you're getting really high
quality candidates to apply to your job
so cost money to list it costs money to
boost it then on top of that it costs
money to write the job description to
spend all the time to go through all the
resumes that you get to spend all the
time and all the interviews you get you
might do in-person interviews and that
costs money to fly the Canada out you're
probably playing for a flight you're
probably paying for a hotel you're
probably playing for an Uber you're
probably paying for food that all adds
up to tens of thousands of dollars it's
expensive for them to hire the right
people but it's important that they hire
the right people because they hire them
wrong person that's also expensive
because they spent all that money
interviewing this person bringing them
on training them only to find out a
couple months later oh crap this
person's not the best person they don't
have the best attitude we don't want
them and then start the whole process
over again so what you may not realize
is hiring is actually very difficult and
very expensive and so for these
companies they're really incentivizes
how do I get the best talent with the
least cost and really what it comes down
to is a high trust Factor they want
these people to be low risk and you as
an internal pivoter are that your low
cost and your low risk and your
potentially High reward so I was this
lab technician I had worked there for I
think two years probably so they knew my
work ethic they knew I showed up to work
on time they knew I loved to learn they
knew if there was a deadline I'd get it
done they knew I could work in a team
they knew all about my personality right
because I had two years of experience
with me and so when I told them hey I
think I could be you know potentially
good at this data stuff like I'm gonna
do a few projects I'm going to show you
that I'm capable of doing it and I
showed my boss he was like Wow Avery
you're actually pretty good at this you
should maybe step into this data role
and that's how I landed My First Data
job was by basically having my company
have an opening showing them that I had
the technical capabilities of doing it I
did that by building a project and
showing it to to my boss in this case
and then I got that job opportunity
actually handed to me and if it wasn't
for Vapor sense I don't know if I'd be
on this podcast today that was my
introduction to the data world that was
my first you know step into the data
world like the first step my foot in the
door and I don't know if I'd be talking
to you if it wasn't for that internal
pivot I mean it was really easy for me
because I didn't have to apply I didn't
have to make a resume I did have to make
a project that's always going to be part
of the process but I didn't get ghosted
by anybody I didn't have to spend all
this time writing cover letters I was
just like hey we need a data person I
think I could do a potentially good job
like you guys know I'm a good person I'm
a good worker can I potentially be a
good fit and so if you like your company
you don't have to leave it to become a
data analyst now it's true for most jobs
some companies aren't going to have any
data positions at all but the majority
of them are and if you don't think your
company does I'm going to talk about
some ways that you can double check but
you're probably working at a company
that has some sort of a data role all
right we'll talk about that in a bit but
if you like your company you can stay
you don't have to go work for a tech
company you don't have to go switch to
some different industry or some
different field or some different
company you could actually just stay
where you're at right now and so you
have to be thinking okay I need to be
low risk you know companies like that
and I have the capability to do this and
so company you might like me right so
it's actually sometimes easier because
you're lower risk so like why not try it
so if you're trying to land that First
Data job look inside of your company it
might be hiding right in front of you so
does your company have data people
already that's something you may or may
not know you might be thinking nah my
company doesn't have any data people but
hold on let me talk through a couple
different scenarios that I've seen
before for so one of my favorite ones is
actually from one of my students inside
the data analytics accelerator program
she was a teacher but obviously teachers
are not data analysts and schools you
wouldn't really think have data analysts
right but her District actually had a
data analyst coordinator position open
and through the data analytics
accelerator program Erica was able to
learn the skills necessary she was able
to build a portfolio and she was able to
learn how to send messages and cold
messages and network and she was able to
reach out to the district and say hey
you know I've worked in this district
for this amount of time I have these
projects I know how to do excel I know
how to do SQL I know how to do Tableau
here's my portfolio that backs all this
up I saw you had this opening for this
data position I think I'd be the best
candidate because not only do I have the
data skills but I have all of the domain
knowledge and she ended up Landing that
job so you know a random fifth grade
teacher you wouldn't think that is the
place to find a data job but it was
sitting right in front of her and she
was a able to take advantage of that you
might work for a bank you might be like
a bank teller or something like that I
guarantee you your bank has data analyst
positions open maybe not at the local
branch per se but at the corporate level
it definitely has data analysts and you
can get referred to those more easily
than if you're trying to land uh a
different job in a different industry
because they know you so if you work for
Chase Bank Chase Bank knows you your
manager can vouch for you you have a
work history of not messing up you know
you're performing well they want to hire
from within it costs them less money
most places where you work there is a
data analyst position if you're in a
school there's probably a data analyst
position if you're in a hospital there's
most likely a data analyst position if
you work in retail there's most likely a
data analyst position so we can find
data analytics positions at most large
corporate companies and you can ask your
boss hey do we have a data analytics
team do you know if that corporate
there's anyone that does data analytics
or you can go on LinkedIn you can search
for the the company you can search
whatever your company name is go to the
people Tab and search by data and that's
going to show you all the people that
work for that company that have the word
data anywhere on their profile and you
can peruse through and see who those
people are what their titles are and you
can reach out to them on LinkedIn and
say hey I saw you're a data person at my
company are you in the same area as me
can we maybe do a coffee chat together
I'd love to learn I've worked at this
company for five years as this role but
I'm really interested in data can you
tell me a little bit more what it's like
to work at this company inside data and
they're likely to help you in fact you
don't even have to reach out to them on
LinkedIn most corporate companies have
some sort of employee directory so for
instance when I worked at Exxon Mobil we
had Skype a lot of people have teams you
can just send them a direct message on
your company's internal messaging
platform they're not going to say no you
know they want to help people from
within and as long as you're nice and
they're nice you should be able to talk
to them and learn from them so you can
talk to your boss you can do that
LinkedIn search I just told you about
you can go to the LinkedIn company page
and go to jobs and even see if they're
hiring any data people that way you know
that there's already an opening and you
could be like hey I'm a good fit for
this role check me out right this is a
good option for landing your first day
to roll this is actually easier than
going and perusing you know hundreds of
jobs that have hundreds of candidates
where they don't know anything about you
you apply with your resume to the black
hole the spray and pray approach but I
don't even look at your resume if you're
applying internally and you've talked to
the manager you've talked to the team
then they're going to look at your
resume I guarantee you it's just the
lowest risk for them the highest reward
unless you've done terrible things at
the company they're going to at least
consider you now I'm not saying you're
going to get the job but I'm going to
say you're at least going to get an
interview which is a big deal when
you're trying to land that First Data
job and once you find these people for
instance you've gone on LinkedIn you've
maybe talked to your manager you need to
find every person that works in the data
world over in that company and talk to
them talk to all of them if there's five
data analysts talk to all five of the
data analysts you don't have to do it
all in a row but maybe you spend five
weeks one person a week you have a 15
minute coffee chat hey what's it like to
be a data analyst at this company hey
how did you become a data analyst at
this company what type of tools do you
use what type of skills do you use ask
them a bunch of questions and you're
doing that one to learn more about them
and more about what they do right but
you're also being kind of sneaky here
and you are prepping them so that when
they need to hire a six data analyst
they're like oh crap we gotta write the
job description and we got to do all
these interviews and then we got to fly
these people out it's going to cost us a
lot of money or we could just go talk to
Avery over there in the chemical lab
technician Department he seemed
interested in it he expressed interest
and he seemed like a nice guy we could
maybe interview him first you know we
don't have to put this out to the public
yet what if we just interview him first
and we like him he seems like he could
learn it right and so you're actually
putting yourself as potential employee
number one for any future job openings
you're top of mind when you do this so
go talk to all the data analysts go talk
to their managers and say hey what would
it take for me to come from my team to
your team what would that road map look
like what would that path look like just
ask him be up front their incentive is
to help you because like I said hiring
is hard and it's expensive and if you're
a good person the company knows it they
have an incentive to help you out that's
not going to be true at all companies
some companies aren't going to be as
cool about this as others but a lot of
them are because companies like to make
money and like I said you are saving
company money if you can be an internal
pivot all right next what you do is you
need to be using data analysis at your
current position so any way you possibly
can try to be using data and analytics
at your current job so for instance
going back to Erica as a fifth grade
teacher you know make some cool charts
in your grading create some sort of
pivot table to to show progress I don't
know your domains but figure out a way
that you could use Excel or you could
use Tableau in your current position so
that way you're practicing but you're
also showing improving to your company
hey look I got the technical skills like
you guys need me actually like look at I
know the domain really well and I have
these technical skills I'm the complete
package I'm the whole enchilada that's
what I was doing as a chemical lab
technician I started using Excel to do
some data and Analysis stuff and then it
got bigger and I started coding and all
this stuff and eventually when it was
like yeah you're right my company tried
for like six months to hire another data
person they spent money listing the job
they spent money promoting like
sponsoring the job post they spent money
interviewing people they spent money
flying people out they didn't hire
anyone and they hired me I was cheap it
worked out great for them and they were
really excited about it and then this is
more leaning towards bigger companies
but then start to attend the data
analytics specific events so for
instance when I worked at Exxon there
was lots of data events that anyone
could come to we had the authors of the
big book of dashboards come to Exxon and
help basically professionals learn how
to use data visualization more on their
job anyone could attend that and I
started attending those and I got my
face out I mean I asked that I was
already doing data stuff but there was
people you know who are transitioning
into the data world at Exxon and they
showed up to those events they got the
the data managers learned their name
they saw their work and they became
prime number one candidates for when
another job opening popped up inside
their team so you know if they have a
lunch and learn go to the lunch and
learn if they have a training go to the
training another student that was inside
the data analytics accelerator another
student Evan now works at Nasa and he's
like it's so sick I have all these lunch
and learns all the time and you know
Evan's a data analyst at this company so
he's going to those already but for
instance if someone at Nasa wasn't a
data analyst we wanted to become one
they should go to those data analytics
lunch and learns they need to like be
seen with the crowd and if you do those
things if you figure out if your company
has dated people if you go and literally
Network have a coffee chat with every
single data person at your company if
you start using data at your job and if
you start rotating the these data events
your face is going to get out there
you're going to be top of mind when an
opening hop pops up if one's not already
open right now you're going to be the
first person they interview are you
gonna get the job I can't guarantee it
but I can guarantee you get a chance and
that's worth a lot because I know a lot
of you guys are out there you're
applying for dozens and dozens of jobs
getting ghosted you know dozens and
dozens of time and you're so frustrated
you're like ah this sucks right and it
does suck and I'm sorry that's the
process but what I'm telling you what
I've taught you today with this internal
pivot is a way that you can become the
first in line for That interview so that
you get at least a chance to pitch
yourself to share your story right and
that's worth a lot and so I hope you
guys will take this to your heart and
you'll think man I actually kind of like
my company I actually kind of like my
company culture I like where I live I I
like my boss I like my co-workers I
could actually stay here and just become
a data analyst that is a viable path
that you're probably overlooking right
now I know I did until it actually
happened for me at Vapors sense and like
I said I probably wouldn't be talking
inside this microphone on this camera
right now if it wasn't for the
opportunity at Vapor sets so I challenge
you guys to think about what would an
internal pivot look like for you and if
it's something you're going through and
you want some help on I'd highly
recommend that you consider the data
analytic accelerator is my 10-week
program that helps you land your First
Data job in 90 days in module one we go
over this exact same dilemma this exact
same idea where we talk about do you
want an internal pivot or an external
pivot that's one of the first things
we'll talk about and then we'll talk
about it on a 101 call me and you where
we write a roadmap to make sure that we
get you to your dream data job as fast
as possible if that is something of
interest to you there should be a link
Down Below in the description to go
check it out and learn more I encourage
you to do so appreciate you guys
listening have an excellent day

Title: Want to become an Analyst? Start here.

Description: Wanna become a data analyst? Start here.

This is the most upvoted post in the r/datanalysis history, full of advice and a roadmap to becoming a data analyst.

Join me as I'm going to be diving into what their advice was and if I agree or disagree with it.

üåü¬†Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club



Timestamps:
0:52 - Do I need a degree?
1:34 - Is Google Data Analytics Cert enough?
3:39 - Will my degree helps me?
5:54 - What do I need to learn?
8:07 - Do certification matter?
9:01 - Can I get a job right away?
10:36 - Is having a degree is enough?
11:41 - Build a strong foundation
11:58 - Hands-on experience
12:21 - Build your network
12:40 - Education
13:09 - Machine Learning
13:54 - Build portfolio
14:31 - Create personalized resume
14:51 - Practice everyday
14:59 - Have the right attitude
15:20 - Applying the jobs
16:13 - Be very patience


Video Transcript:
want to become a data analyst start here
that's what one Reddit user said three
months ago on the subreddit data
analysis and it ended up getting 737
upvotes which is the most upvoted Post
in the subreddits history so today I'm
going to be diving in look at the
subreddit said what their advice was and
if I agree or disagree with it welcome
to the data career podcast the podcast
that helps aspiring data professionals
land their next data job here's your
host Avery Smith if you're new here my
name is Avery Smith I'm the host of the
data career podcast and I spend all of
my time trying to help people land their
first data job so let's go ahead and hop
into the post here's how this will work
I'm going to read off what the subreddit
user said I'll give my advice yes or no
and then I'll read the answer that the
subreddit said and we'll see if that
confirms or disagrees with what I say so
here's the first question number one do
you need a degree to land a data
analytics job and I talk about this all
the time on the podcast in fact two
episodes ago we had shashawn black on
the show who was evidence of not having
any sort of college degree and Landing a
dated job so is it possible to land a
data job without a degree absolutely yes
is it easier with a degree absolutely
yes it can be both I've had students who
have no college degree land awesome jobs
even maybe better paying and more
flexible jobs than those that have
college degrees but throughout the
process a degree is rarely going to hurt
you it's usually going to be helpful
the subreddit user says answer it's
helpful many job postings for data
analysis ask for a bachelor's degree and
I agree with that all right question
number two will the Google data
analytics certificate from Coursera be
enough to get me a data analytics job my
answer to this is the Google cert enough
ah yes and no the Google cert has a lot
of good information in it in fact a
little bit too much good information in
it it's way too long it covers way too
much content so I'm not a huge fan of
the degree and also in my opinion in
order to land your First Data job you
have to follow the SPN method the ESPN
method stands for skills you have to
learn the right skills P is for the
projects and portfolio you have to build
projects put them on a portfolio so that
it is the evidence that you can do what
your resume says that you can do and
then lastly the ad you have to grow your
network and you use your network to land
that job the Google data analytics
certificate is only focused on the
skills and in my opinion it's not even
focused necessarily on the right skills
it'll focus on Google Sheets a lot which
is very similar to excel but Excel is
way more prevalent in industry it's
going to then focus on tableau which I
think is really good to learn SQL which
is really good to learn and then it
teaches you R and I just don't believe
as a data analyst you'll need to use r
that often and it's not really listed
that often on job descriptions instead I
would focus more on Excel Tableau and
SQL leave out the r for now you can
always come back and learn it later and
also I'm actually just a bigger fan of
python than I am of R but I'm not gonna
get into this bait right now they say no
not even close this degree will not help
you land a job the course teaches you
some of the basic technical concepts of
the industry and that's about it my
feeling on this course is if you took
the entire thing from start to finish
and it didn't scare you away you may
have a chance at this it's marketed
really well as a potential Game Changer
but this cert is asked about 10 times
more than any other but again it's not a
magical key to the industry it lets you
peek into the door and see where you're
getting yourself into and I agree with
this I think you can get a job from the
cert we see lots of you know stories and
experiences of this happening but for
every person that lands a job there's
probably I don't know a thousand that do
not land a job through the certification
and calling it a certification I
understand why it's called certification
but it carries very little to no way
inside of the industry at the time being
so is it good sure is it enough to help
you line your first day to job maybe not
question number three I already have a
degree in X will that help me and my
answer is yes no matter what you've
already used in the past data analytics
can be applied to your industry so if
you're in sales you can be a data
analyst that looks at sales data if
you're in marketing you can be a
marketing analyst if you're a
professional athlete you can use data
analytics in sports analytics no matter
what you're doing in the past it can
somehow be related to data analytics and
and that's because data analytics is
actually really industry agnostic
meaning no matter what industry you're
in data analysis can be used can be
applied to help that business perform
better so I think whatever your previous
background is it will be useful in your
data analyst position the subreddit user
says depending on the position the
recruiter and the company most job
postings show that they are looking for
a degree in related fields for instance
business or statistics Etc more relevant
the better your chances are that it will
help remember to agree is just one part
of the entire package that you should
use to help yourself transition into the
field so I think we're kind of on the
same page here your degree does matter
I'm a little bit more of an optimist
thinking that your degree in the past
will help you in the future I studied
chemical engineering and both of my
first data jobs were within the you know
chemical engineering world and my
background really set me apart in those
different worlds in fact there was
actually something called a game at
Exxon a game was just like a
company-wide analytics tournaments it's
like a hackathon where they would give
us a data set and send us to town just
like you do whatever you want help us
solve business problems with this data
set it's not dissimilar to what I'm
trying to do in the data project Club if
you guys haven't heard about that check
the link in the description down below
to learn more but basically I would
compete in these and I would compete
pretty well I'd end up being the finals
I even won one of them against people
that had phds in computer science like
these people were just smarter than me
they had more school they were better
data scientists better data analysts
than I was but one thing that they
lacked was they didn't understand the
industry they didn't understand the
domain and so that's a lot of the times
I was able to compete with them is
because we got a data set and they'd be
like hey is high sulfur good or is that
bad and any chemical engineer knows you
never really want sulfur for the
majority of the time so having that
background knowledge can actually be one
of your superpowers and help you land a
job over someone who's maybe more
talented or smarter than you so your
domain does matter all right question
number four what do I need to learn I
already talked about this SBN method the
right skills are Excel Tableau SQL in
that order unless you're trying to land
a job that's over 120 thousand dollars
then you're probably going to need some
sort of scripting or Advanced
programming language like r or python or
cloud or something like that the user
says Excel SQL Python and power bi or
Tableau is a great place to start I
would pull python out of that even
though it is my favorite data tool
Python's hard to learn it's going to
take you a long time to learn all of
python and so I would focus on SQL Excel
and then I would focus on Tableau Tablo
and power bi if you know one you can
figure out the other I actually think
power bi is a little bit more intuitive
to use to be honest but it's a lot
harder to access it's only really
available on Windows computers so if you
have a Mac it's going to be a pain in
the butt to even get it going and then
also it really wants you to have a
business email not a Gmail or like a
Hotmail or Yahoo that just makes things
a little bit more complicated so and
tableau's actually asked for more often
than power bi sorry it starts with
Tableau I would ignore power bi for the
time being I ignore python right now
they also say I would learn them in that
order don't Learn Python before learning
Tableau or power bi please don't do that
if you try to Learn Python before power
bi or Tableau it's going to take you a
lot longer than you want to land your
First Data job and it's just going to be
more work than necessary you guys can
learn power bi or Tableau in one to two
weeks if you really are at it like
honestly those things are not hard they
work very similar to like it's just all
drag and drop like there is not very
much coding in either one and so you can
learn those a lot faster than you can
learn python then they say from those
you can start branching them out and
learn SSRS SQL Server reporting service
that's basically just SQL Azure SAS
looker alteryx to be perfectly honest
I've hardly used any of those in my data
journey and if I haven't used them in
you know like the seven plus years of
experience I have you'll probably be
okay not learning them before landing
your First Data job once I've learned
Excel SQL
Tableau I would just focus on building
projects on those versus learning
something new because really learning
those extra skills probably isn't going
to be a huge differentiator unless
there's a specific industry or a
specific company or a specific job you
really want to ask for one of those I'd
recommend holding off right now all
right question number five do
certifications matter my answer is not
really there's not that really many
certifications inside of data analysis
there is the Google data cert which is
new and it'll be become bigger as time
goes on but it's not really even doesn't
really carry that much weight right now
there are some you know certifications
that do carry weight like for instance
the power bi ones some other Microsoft
ones as well but really there's not very
many entry-level jobs that are going to
ask for those so it's kind of Overkill
so instead of focusing on getting
certified to show how good you are I'd
focus more on doing projects to show how
good you are let's see what the Reddit
user says they say do certifications
matter depending on the person who is
hiring to some recruiters it means you
have at least the minimum basic
knowledge set on a topic to others they
may seem as useless throwaways to anyone
spending 30 minutes on the internet
could get I mean I don't think anyone
sees that like their throwaways per se I
think people realize it takes time to
get them but once again they're not
carrying that much weight they're not
really helping you that much
question number six can I get a job
right away my answer is I mean Define
right away like can you get a job
tomorrow probably not but it really
depends on your background and how hard
you are willing to work inside of my
program the data analytics accelerator
it's a 10-week program so that's
supposed to be within 70 days of Landing
your first job I would say we've had
some students do it in about
55-ish that's probably the minimum if
you're starting from absolutely scratch
you know and I've seen it's takes some
people a year to get land that First
Data job there's really some factors
once again it comes down to how well you
can follow the SBN method so if you're
going to try to Learn Python first it's
going to take you 365 days to Learn
Python so it really just depends on your
journey so can you get a job right away
I would say two months is probably the
minimum if you're starting from scratch
but it's definitely possible to do that
in four or five months let's see the
subreddit user's answer it depends on
your experience level if you're trying
to break in from another career it's
going to be difficult and like any job
hunt you will probably be passed up for
those that are experienced already it's
going to come down to your knowledge in
the field and how well you Market
yourself I do love that this person said
it's not only your knowledge in the
field that's your skills the S part of
the SBN method but it's how well you
Market yourself and that's the p in the
end of the ESPN method because it is a
combination you know I've had some
students who are less skilled land jobs
than students who are better skilled
just because they're better at marketing
themselves and I hate to say that I wish
it was just the most talented person
that got deserved the job got it every
single time but it's just not the case
you have to be marketing yourself and
that's why building the projects and
building your network is so important
all right I lost tracks of the questions
but here's another one is having a
degree in X enough to get me a data role
I don't really know if I understand this
question like we talked about do you
need a degree or not having a degree and
you know an unrelated field is that
enough and like I said if you're willing
if you're able to show your skills on a
portfolio that you can actually do what
your resume says you can do you can
actually do excel you can actually do
SQL you can actually do Tableau then
you're going to be fine you're going to
land a job you know let's see what this
user says probably not again depends on
the company and the hiring manager
you're going to improve your chances by
adding a great resume and experience to
your degree so I'm not really sure about
that one it's kind of a throwaway but if
you do not have a math degree or an
engineering degree or a statistics
degree or a computer science degree you
can still land the data job 100 I see it
happen literally every week inside of
the data analytics accelerator program
we had a music therapist well I've never
even heard of that degree before she
just landed a data job we've had
chemists land data jobs we've had
English Majors land data jobs it really
doesn't play a huge role what you
studied in the past then this user gives
a road map to breaking into data
analytics and it's kind of lengthy here
I'll just go ahead and read the top
bullet build a strong foundation in data
analysis and visualization I think
that's true as well and they say this
includes SQL Excel and data
visualization tools like power bi and
Tableau okay so they left out python of
this one so I agree with that yeah
definitely Excel SQL and I would do
Tableau over power Pi number two get
hands-on experience the best way to get
experience is work on data analysis
projects you can do this through
internships volunteer work or personal
projects I'm going to be honest doing it
through internships or volunteer work I
haven't seen work very well so it's
probably going to be more on that
personal projects this will help you
build a portfolio of work that you can
showcase to a potential employer if you
can find out how to become become more
involved with this type of work and your
current career do it okay number three
network with the people in the fields
definitely agree with this one attend
data analytics meetups conferences and
other events to meet people in the field
and learn about the latest trends and
Technologies LinkedIn and meet up are
excellent places to start have a strong
LinkedIn page and build a network of
people I agree with all this I think
that's easier said than done but I don't
have any qualms about that one number
four education consider pursuing a
degree or certification in data
analytics or related fields such as
statistics or computer science I
strongly disagree with this one I mean
it's going to take you tens of thousands
of dollars and years to do one of those
things right like people don't have the
time and people don't want to spend that
much money I would much rather invite
you to come to data analytics
accelerator it's going to take you a
fraction of the time and a fraction of
the cost and honestly I think your odds
of Landing a job are about the same so I
disagree with this one considerably
number five learn machine learning don't
learn machine learning if you're trying
to become a data analyst once again if
you're trying to land that First Data
job and unless you want some something
that pays more than a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars a year in the US then
machine learning is just going to be a
waste of time it's going to be Overkill
it's not even really in demand for data
analysts like and if it is you could
learn linear regression multivariate
linear regression and that's a form of
machine learning and that's pretty
pretty simple and would get you really
far you know in the field actually but I
really would not if you're really
struggling to land that First Data job
learning machine learning putting that
in your repertoire is probably not the
Difference Maker to be honest is it cool
yes but that's probably not why you're
Landing a data job yeah so I don't
really think that's a data analyst role
and that's really one of the things that
separates a data analyst from a data
scientist so disagree with that one ah
number six build a portfolio obviously I
agree with this one creating portfolio
of your work is a great way to Showcase
your skills and experience to potential
employers your portfolio should include
examples of data analysis projects
you've worked on as well as relevant
certifications or Awards you've earned
that would be SQL Excel Python and
visualization tool lots of YouTube
videos out there to help you get started
for instance I have have over 30 on my
YouTube channel Avery Smith on YouTube
go check those out
the user didn't say that in fact they
have like this like YouTube suggestions
at the bottom of the page and they
didn't even mention me set but go check
that out and get started create a resume
tailor your resume to highlight your
skills I kind of think that's a
no-brainer be sure to use numbers to
quantify your accomplishments numbers
are good I like that how much time or
cost was saved or what percentage of
errors were identified and corrected
that's really good emphasize
transferable skills such as problem
solving attention to detail and
communication I think that's really good
as well let's see practice the more you
practice the better you'll become
practice every day don't forget the
skills that you learn I think that
that's good without saying have the
right attitude self-doubt questioning if
you're doing the right thing being
unsure and thinking about staying where
you're will not get you to your goal
having a positive outlook that you will
do this is the only way to get there I
agree this a lot of this is mental
mindset and so that's why having a coach
and a community around you to keep you
going is so important you definitely
want that and that's one of the things
we we offer in the data analytics
accelerator applying LinkedIn is the
best place to start indeed monster and
dice are also good websites to try be
prepared to not hear back from the
majority of companies you apply to don't
search for data analysts you will limit
your results too much I don't agree with
that you could definitely search data
analyst definitely can but you can
search for the skills you have for
instance SQL power bi this will return
many results it just depends on the
company calls the position data
scientist data analyst data
visualization Specialists business
intelligence manager could all have be
the same thing I mean that's a stretch I
mean definitely data analysts and data
visualization Specialists could be the
same but calling a business intelligence
manager a data scientist the same that's
a little bit of a stretch but you know
what I'm not going to harp on this too
much because there is so many different
titles in the data world and they do
carry low meaning like people don't have
like a standard so I get the point I
just don't think these examples were the
best ones
and last one is practice oh that was the
same one as eight it's going to take
weeks or months at a minimum to get into
data analytics it's definitely going to
take weeks you're definitely not going
to do this in like one to two weeks it's
going to take some time so that was some
of the suggestions that this Reddit user
said then they said be prepared for an
application process like this you're
going to apply to a hundred jobs that's
a lot of jobs to apply to my students
probably don't get that high on the day
of job applications you're going to get
ghosted by 65 of them once again that's
a high number I would probably say a
little bit lower but it's going to
happen rejected 25 so that's 65 plus 25
70 80. so we have what 20 left 10
initial contact and then get ghosted six
percent ghosted after initial contact
three percent second interviewer
technical quiz three a low ball offer
one maybe you found something decent
after all
that's a little pessimistic in my view
and if you've done a good job with your
network you're definitely not going to
have to go through this many job
applications you're not going to get
ghosted as much if you can get recruited
or referred this changes the game and so
that's why that and the ESPN method the
network is a third of the whole method
of Landing your data job that's how
important it is you have to be using
your network to land that data job
because that's going to cut this time in
half cut this effort in half which is
really important so I think if you're
using your network and using your
portfolio then this is a little dramatic
if you're just using the spray and pray
method of you know you learn some skills
on Coursera and you're just kind of
randomly applying to as many jobs as you
can this might be more accurate for that
but it's not what I see in the data
analytics accelerator as much so there
you go that is my response to the want
to become a data analyst start here
thread on the subreddit data analysis if
you want to become a data analyst I'm
biased but I think the data analytics
accelerator is the best place to start
this is my 10 week boot camp that you're
supposed to do 10 10 to 15 hours a week
or if you don't want to do it that fast
you can do it in 20 weeks and spend
between five and eight hours a week and
it's going to help you land that First
Data job in 90 days it is amazing we
have so many people inside this program
they're enjoying it they're Landing data
jobs every single week if you want to
learn more about this program click the
link in the description down below and I
hope to see you there I'd love to be
your coach and I'd love to have you be
part of this program

Title: Data Project Club Kickoff (Manufacturing Data)

Description: The grand opening of Data Project Club & kick off for the May project!

üè≠ We will be working on industrial manufacturing data! 


Note: if you didn't know, my wife and I are expecting on April 30th. The baby might come sooner, it might come later. Based on what happens, this meeting may be postponed.

Video Transcript:
all right now you guys should be able to
hear me hi everyone sorry rough start
let's go where are you guys watching
from welcome everyone good morning uh I
hope you're doing well I'm glad all of
you guys are here and thank you for
letting me know that you uh couldn't
hear me that's never a good thing when
you uh when you can't hear me right
um
stoked to have all of you guys here
let's go ahead and see where some of you
guys are from we got arsh in Toronto we
got Kimberly in Houston we got uh no
watching in El Salvador hi we got uh
Luciana from Ireland hi Luciana
Azerbaijan Maryland Dallas Fort Worth
Louisiana awesome you guys I'm stoked
that all of you guys are here
um so fun all right we got some people
watching on LinkedIn we have some people
uh watching on YouTube looks like this
is an awesome crew I'm super excited to
uh have all of you guys here and be with
us we're going to be doing some awesome
things today and um yes this is being
recorded
um Virginia Libya wow amazing you guys
Texas this is just crazy thank you guys
so much uh for being here I'm excited to
be doing this with you guys and um we're
gonna go ahead and get started I'm just
gonna make sure that everyone
um knows that we're we're doing this
right now right that's what we're trying
to do make sure everyone knows so give
me one second and we'll hop right into
it
um continue to tell me where you guys
are from I want to know where Everyone's
Watching from we have such a big
audience today and such a cool such a
cool crew
um so this is absolutely amazing let's
go ahead
um just say we are live and let's put
this link right here
I can probably embed it huh let me see
if I can just figure that out embed
copy yep and you'll just paste that in
actually
and let's see perfect you guys I'm so
excited to be here with you we're gonna
go ahead and get started Let's Do It
um
so hi everyone if you haven't met me
before uh my name is Avery Smith I
absolutely love where all of you guys
are from this is absolutely incredible
we are streaming on YouTube and we are
streaming on LinkedIn as well um so
that's why you'll see some of the users
are from LinkedIn some of them are from
YouTube
um we have people from all over the
world so thank you for waking up early
staying up late whatever you had to do
to be here uh this is this is awesome
um so can you watch the recording later
sure yep anyone can watch this recording
later
um so I'm gonna get into what we're
doing right now so uh good morning from
I'm not exactly how many sure of you
guys are are watching it looks like we
have about 70 over on YouTube I don't
know how many on LinkedIn
um but thank you guys for for being here
once again and um yeah let's let's go
ahead and hop into it so this is the
kickoff call for the data project Club
if you've never heard of the data
project club before you can go ahead and
uh go check it out at
dataprojectclub.com okay so just type in
data projectclub.com and that will take
you to
um to what we're talking about data
projectclub.com
if you've never seen this before that's
we're going to be talking about today
this is kind of the grand kickoff for
the data project Club all right
um so I want to go ahead and tell you
guys what the data project Club is I'll
give you an introduction to what data
what data project we'll be tackling this
month
we'll talk about the data set we'll talk
about the prompt
um we'll talk about the book club we'll
talk about teammates uh we'll talk a
little bit more about this month's
project and we'll do a q a session for
any questions you guys have we'll tackle
them together
so be thinking about your questions and
feel free to to ask anything all right
um so the first thing I want to do is
share my screen here
see share screen share screen boom
okay so if you guys had to once again
dataprojectclub.com this is where you
can learn more about the data project
Club all right
um the idea behind the data project Club
is you know there's a lot of people of
you guys out there who want to work on
projects but don't know where to start
and so the data project Club gives them
a place to practice collaborate and grow
together
um here's what you can expect is we're
going to be doing these calls monthly uh
we're going to be having a community
chat monthly competitions uh a monthly
book club
project prom project write-up guide
expert feedback co-working sessions team
collaboration lots of fun stuff all
right
um specifically I want to talk a little
bit more on what this uh project of the
month is so there's two ways to
participate for the data project Club
all right there's two ways to
participate uh one is inside the
community okay
um inside the community we're going to
have the ability to communicate with one
another at some extra perks okay or you
can participate on LinkedIn those are
the two places you can participate on
LinkedIn or inside the community now the
club is absolutely full for the
community we have unless unless you're
going to be part of the pro or the
Premium plan the pro and the Premium
plan we have spots left uh but inside of
the community otherwise we're completely
full you need to participate on LinkedIn
or inside the community both both are
great okay
um inside of the community you're going
to get the Community Access you're going
to get all of the recordings this
recording will be available to everyone
um but the other one I do later in the
in the month will not you're gonna get
all of the access to the files and codes
that I create I'm going to assign you
teammates like teams we're gonna do
co-working sessions and then the premium
you also will get expert feedback on
your projects access to the data project
Bible which is a book I'm working on
so those are two options for joining or
you can play along on LinkedIn for
absolutely okay
um so this month's project is all about
so once again if you're interested in
either of these head to
dataprojectclub.com we even have
um a promo going on uh I don't know if
there's any left or not to be honest let
me try using the code 25 off and seeing
if that helps
um so let's go ahead and talk about this
month's project all right
um is the community on the heartbeat app
yes it is and if you guys aren't
familiar with the community with the
heartbeat app looks like it's going to
look like this so this is what heartbeat
looks like it's basically like slack um
it's just a little bit more intuitive
um so inside of here we're gonna have
things like uh you know the book club
conversation we're going to have project
of the month conversation you know we're
going to talk about what's going on
take votes as a club
um you know have a chat room with one
another we're going to be doing the
project submissions we'll be here expert
feedback will be here project chat will
be here now a lot of you guys how many
of you guys are if you're already inside
the heartbeat app say me okay there's a
lot of you guys inside the heartbeat app
uh there's about I think 997 of you guys
inside of the heartbeat app already
um if we are in the heartbeat app do we
need to use or to join on the website so
um Michael you're part of daa there's
some special information uh for Dia
members da members have a little bit of
different stuff going on you can look at
the announcements board and you'll find
some information on that
um wow a lot of you guys are already in
it all right so a lot of you guys are in
it and I can't promise you that those of
you guys who are a part of the pro or
the Premium plan
um will be will be inside of the the
heartbeat app forever
um the heartbeat app is probably going
to be a pro or a premium feature uh down
the road there's just too many of you
guys and it's too expensive to be on
um but everyone can participate for free
on LinkedIn I'm gonna put all of the
project information on LinkedIn you just
won't have access to the Community you
don't have access to the previous stuff
the files all that but everyone's going
to get the bulk of it which is this
month's project so let's go ahead and
talk about uh this month's project okay
this month's project is a manufacturing
data project and I made you guys this
badge right here that you can actually
um that you can copy in fact I'll just
actually just dropped the image link I
think this only goes to YouTube so if
you're if you're on LinkedIn you might
not be able to see this uh but I'll go
ahead and drop that that is the image
link this is your badge
this badge is once again free for anyone
who's participating this month you can
post that on your LinkedIn and then you
will say you can say something like this
I'll actually
um
put this in the chat as well once again
I think it's only on YouTube that will
be able to see this if you're not
watching on YouTube go ahead and head
over to YouTube it's probably a better
experience than LinkedIn to be honest
um there you go and if you if you're on
my on my YouTube right now and you guys
haven't hit subscribe go ahead and hit
subscribe because this is where I'll be
doing a lot of the the free calls is on
YouTube okay
so
um let's see here so yes there is that
information you guys get the badge and
then the badge prompt this is just a way
to show that you're participating it's
all totally optional
um but what we'll be doing this month is
we're going to be solving a real world
manufacturing data analytics problem so
it's going to learn we're going to learn
how we can use sensor data and Industry
4.0 that's a term that they use kind of
to say smart and Manufacturing uh
basically the next generation of
manufacturing and engineering and how
can we use data analytics to help in the
manufacturing field and so the prompt
that you'll be getting this challenge is
right once again it's on the website
dataproject.com
dataprojectclub.com anyone can access
this is you have been hired uh once
again you've this is more for data
intermediate people people who already
know how to do data analytics and we're
just building our portfolio we're just
working on building our portfolio
working on growing together as team and
practicing this will be a great place to
practice your skills it might not be the
best place to learn your skills because
I will not be doing in-depth tutorials
on how to do anything I'll be giving you
guys my code for example and maybe
talking about my code this will not be
like in-depth tutorials at all all right
so for this project you've been hired as
a data professional for a manufacturing
industrial Manufacturing Company energy
mobile all right everyone put the word
energy Mobile in the chat that is your
new boss all right energy mobile energy
mobile is basically
sounds like a company that I may know
right
um this is just kind of an example all
right this is a made-up company this
data is real data um but it is taken
we'll talk about the where it's from
right but your your role is to be a data
professional for energy mobile and to
provide value to that company okay by
using data all right so here are your
tasks
if you if you so choose to uh
participate all right actually let's
let's actually do this all right
um how many of you guys
I gave three different prompts for three
different options that you have you can
either work this month as a data analyst
a data scientist or a data engineer so
actually let me let me know what you
guys
um let me know what you guys want to
participate as in the chat do you guys
choose to do you guys are thinking about
participating as a data analyst a data
scientist or a data engineer okay put it
in the chat I want to know I'm
personally going to be focusing this
month on uh data analyst all right data
analysts that's what I'm going to be
focused on we got lots of people
focusing on data analysts the mains
focusing on data scientists uh we got
lots of analysts though a little bit of
DS
got a little bit of DS right here
engineer from Bastion we got Perry as a
data scientist
got uh Levi as a data analyst awesome
you guys and this is this is the whole
point is you get to choose this is kind
of like a go
at your own pace Choose Your Own
Adventure you get to choose what you
want to work on so what I've done is
I've heard three different prompts for a
data analyst and a scientist and a data
engineer okay and you guys get to choose
which one you'd want to work on yourself
all right this is Choose Your Own
Adventure all right and and to be honest
you could choose all three you just
choose one you just choose half of one
this is totally up to you I'm just
giving you the starting point and you
get to choose where you go with that
starting point so if you want to be a
data analyst this is what you're going
to be tasked with doing is creating a
monitoring dashboard that allows
management to understand the
manufacturing process in more detail so
if you're a data analyst all my data
site here this is for you you're going
to be creating a manufacturing uh
monitoring dashboard all right that's
what you're going to be starting with I
just saw this question how do we join
the club all right if you want to join
the club you join on LinkedIn it's going
to be happening for free on LinkedIn or
you can go to
dataprojectclub.com which is actually
right here and come up here and hit the
join club button and you can join one of
our tiers Pro or the premium tier okay
those are the the two the three options
you have participate on LinkedIn prepay
in the Pro Plan or participate in the
premium all right
um so
with the data analyst you'll be clicking
on this data link right here and this is
the CSV that you'll be working with all
right
this CSV is going to have a couple
different columns you can see them right
here and a date and you go ahead and
right click on this click save as and
then you can save it as a CSV and you
can put that for instance in your
downloads I call the hourly data hit
save now go to the downloads folder do
that and pop it up and here's our data
right so uh it looks like I gave you an
extra time column you can just delete
that that's not really important but the
data you'll have is the time you'll have
the cooling efficiency the cooling power
the motor power let me see if I can
actually make this a little bit bigger
for you guys to see it all right
the motor power the volumetrics flow one
the volumetric flow two the volumetric
or the pressure one the pressure two
pressure three the pressure four
pressure five the pressure six
efficiency Factor temperature one
temperature two temperature three
temperature four the vibration and the
date okay this is what's going to it's
going to be given to you the CSV is
going to be given to you everything in
Avery I don't know what the heck's going
on let's go ahead and learn a little bit
more about what we're dealing with right
so this data set comes from a real
hydraulic rig system now a hydraulic rig
system is basically an engineering
machine that's used for a couple
different things but one of the most
important is actually getting oil out of
the ground using that process all right
has four different controls that you can
like play with and you'll get different
results the cooling setting the valve
setting the pump setting and the
accumulator setting all right so those
are the four things that like the users
can control and then it has a bunch of
sensors put on the rig in different
places that will allow you to see like
what's going on all right you know it
has the pressure the volumetric flows
the pressure is like how much stuff is
in there and how much it's pushing
the the volumetric flows is basically
the speed of the liquid going through
the machine and temperature is how hot
it is how hot or cold it is all right
and if you don't know more you know
about if you don't like you know a whole
lot
um yeah you know someone's like I'm kind
of going in here perfect yeah you know
like this is the chemical engineering or
mechanical engineering type problem but
the really cool thing about data
analytics
doesn't matter what domain you're in you
can do data analytics and so you could
for instance if you have no experience
with engineering you can still be a data
analyst or data scientist or data here
on this problem
so that gives you a little bit of an
idea of what a hydraulic rig is you can
go online for example and just type in
hydraulic rig and go ahead and look at
some pictures that they have right so
like um yeah this is a pretty good
example of what we're dealing with right
here so you're basically like a big kind
of tractor-looking machine right like
this right and if you want to learn more
about how they work what do you do you
just go to Google
or YouTube you know
so YouTube
uh and you know you can watch one of
these videos and learn a little bit more
about what a hydraulic uh drilling rig
is like what these different machines
are how it works all that good stuff in
fact this is probably a video
that's that's kind of what we're dealing
with hydraulic and so if you're in that
data analyst you want to be a data
analyst what you're going to be doing is
creating a monitoring dashboard that
allows management to just understand the
process more in detail now what that
dashboard actually have I'm going to
leave it up to you that's your job
that's not my job to tell you what to
create this is a club where I'm going to
give you the start and help you get
started it's your responsibility the
rest of the task all right if you need
more guided help you'll have more guided
help inside the community and the
premium and I trust that you guys figure
it out all right
so uh as a data analyst you're going to
take this right here this data and make
some sort of a dashboard for like
management to look at you know you have
to decide what's important do you think
you should include those types of things
all right now what are you going to use
to build that dashboard it's totally up
to you you can use Excel you can use
Google data Studio you could use power
bi you could use you could draw it maybe
even you know just do handheld data it
is totally up to you yeah so if that
says for data list we use Tableau that
is I'm not going to make that choice
once again that is your choice uh to
make personally and if you're inside of
the club what you'll see like my files
and what I'll actually be doing I'll
personally be using tableau and I'm
actually going to be following uh what's
what's actually the book of the month
kind of a little bit to help you make
this project so the book of the month is
right here it's the big book of
dashboards I'm going to pass this
address
um inside of the chat book of the month
right
all right put that link right there that
is
um Amazon affiliate link so if you end
up purchasing it I'll get like two
pennies
is it just so I'm clear oh my gosh did
that link not work hold on
hold on that link doesn't work
hold on hold on what's going on
ah okay you have to copy and paste I
guess uh so you can see it right here
it's between 21 and 24 it's an awesome
book all right
um let me make sure that you guys get
that right link right there
so if you're on LinkedIn we don't have
to sign up yep you don't have to sign up
all right so that is the other link oh I
put it into two things
well I kind of messed that one okay
really quickly
just so you guys can get the right ring
let me fix that
data project Club
right here
and let me fix that link for us down
here at the bottom
all right there and this right here
should be a link
and oh yeah it looks like it got
corrupted somehow okay there we go
let's just check one more time refresh
the page
let's see
there we go now that link works so once
again the the book is right here it's
called The Big Book of dashboards I have
it on my shelf where did I put that book
hold on let's see what color is it it's
kind of a yellow big look at that
all right
so this is the book of the month I
highly recommend you get it I really
like this book and that's why I
recommending it
um is very useful for anyone internet
Journey at all it's all about dashboard
so it's probably the most comprehensive
book about building dashboards uh it is
pretty Tableau like heavy I would say
um like it's very it's very top low
heavy
um and that's what I would recommend you
know you checking out this month all
right
um
once again if you're inside of the
program we'll do some of these
collaborations for you if you're not
inside the program you're kind of you're
going to find your own Trends on
LinkedIn each of however you want to do
you have any courses for someone who is
starting from beginner to become a data
analyst all right good question 60 sick
so if that's what you're interested in
because that's what this is not this
club is not how to become a data analyst
at all right
where to go here if you're interested
and learning about how to become a data
analyst I have a program right here it's
called the data analytics accelerator
program this program right here is where
I help people plan their first data job
within 90 days so you can see some of
our testimonials uh you can also join
the program if you send me if you're
interested in this program send me the
on LinkedIn you can send me the word daa
and I can send you a coupon that would
be okay
so you can send me that
um okay so going back to the data
project Club focusing on the big book of
dashboards so why do I like this book
this book is written by three Tableau
experts uh flexor Jeffrey Shaffer and
Annie Cochrane
and Steve both have like their own
Consulting slash uh like uh education
business around Tableau and Andy is
actually like one of like the head
people
um at tableaus now so this book is
really awesome it's written by three
different people
and I really like it because it's going
to cover the best practice this is a
data visualization so it covers like
I'll just open it up real fast it covers
things like
you know
um let me see here on the color install
principles you know shapes you know how
do we visualize data what's the best
practices how people use dashboards
what to avoid common chart types of
things but then it dives into 28
straight life examples of uh different
real real world dashboards right I
really like these real world dashboards
that it shows because giving literally
28 different examples of real life
scenarios from all different Industries
showing all different types of
dashboards like for example
um I'll show you guys like here's the
web analytics dashboard and then it
spends the next few pages uh talking
about like what makes this dashboard
work why this dashboard's good why is
that not good and so for for this
session I actually recommend chapter one
chapter nine and then I accidentally
copied in the wrong thing in three page
and then chapter 31 visualizing time
so chapter one I'm gonna dive through
all things data visualization then
chapter nine specifically is a a
dashboard that's going to be on power
plant uh operations Monitor and so if I
was just getting started I was going to
be a data analyst I'd probably look at
chapter nine of this book to uh kind of
get some ideas of maybe some things I
could do now the data set isn't the same
you know match up exactly but once again
it's like a good question to get you
started so this is kind of what the
dashboard looks like you can feel for
your screenshot if you like I think that
you can have this password online but
over the next you know that's the
dashboard and then over the next one two
yeah three four five six
seven eight nine pages the authors are
going to dive in and tell you why it
works you know what's good about the
dashboard what can be improved why they
use different things in different
scenarios uh I really like it
um a lot so um I really highly remember
the dashboard I highly recommend chapter
one which is going to be a data
visualization a primer basically watch
you through all the best practices of
digitalization I recommend chapter nine
with the PowerPoint uh operations
monitoring which is a good dashboard
model for this project I recommend
chapter 31 which is on visualizing time
which details how to visualize time
series data well and this is all about
time shares right this data set is a
time so
um that is kind of what you would
consider if you were doing the data
analyst part of this project so I'm
going to pause right here I'm going to
ask any questions you guys have any
questions uh about this this so far I'll
pass the link to the data set as well
while the discussions are coming in if
you're a data scientist you'll be
working on the exact same data set the
exact same prompt right you'll be taking
it from a different approach instead of
making you know an industrial uh what do
we call it a manufacturing monitoring
dashboard you'll be creating a fault
detection and classification model
instead okay Kathleen says should
dashboard be interactive and the answer
is I don't know it's totally up to you
uh there's pros and cons mostly just
Pros yeah I'd say the majority of the
time but it's not like if you if you
don't make it interactive it's not going
to be good like you can definitely have
a non-interactive dashboard that could
be that could be really great I focus
Less on the idea of this should be
interactive or not and focus a little
bit more on is this um
is this useful for the business you know
is this actually helping for business
move forward those type of things right
um so it can be interactive doesn't have
to be
okay we're all my data scientists now if
you're a data scientist and you're
you're you want to do the data science
part of this
um say say me in the chat okay if you're
a data scientist you're not going to be
a data analyst you're going to be data
scientists and you're going to be tasked
with creating a fault detection and
classification model uh to discover when
and what caused the process to be great
right
um you'll start with the combined data
set so once again you'll start this name
data set and you're gonna be just
looking at things from not a dashboard
standpoint but you're going to try to
find faults and classify faults to
discover what and when happened in the
process all right so
um you're gonna start the same data set
right here
um right here you'll just right click
save as dsv all right
uh David says I'm sorry if you said this
but you will leave the stream up on your
channel so we can watch later yes this
stream will be left up on my YouTube If
you want a lot later no problem
um
okay uh let's go ahead and move on from
data scientists does that make sense
data scientists you'll be using full
detection and classification so I'm not
really focusing on that this month so
like I'm not going to make a whole lot
of content about that I'll probably make
a little bit more content about the
manufacturing monitoring dashboard
um but if you have any questions and
you're inside of the community you can
ask if you're on the pro or the Premium
plan we can talk about what type of file
detection and classification that you
can create I will say that if you're
doing the data Sciences project you
might want to
um read this a little bit more so oil
well 500
000 a day so these machines are highly
important uh to use really well right
um you want to make sure that we run
them with data uh effectively because
this is a lot of money for our company
I'm going to be focusing on the data
analyst task this month uh the original
data set is actually taken from the
University of California Irvine machine
learning repository so you can go right
here
click on this and actually see this is
where I got the data set I'm showing you
guys exactly where I got the data set
you can read more about it more of a
description that explains it a little
bit more technically than me right
um and someone said someone said ah I
don't want to use this because the
University of California Irvine always
has clean data sets and I can promise
you guys that if you start this data set
from scratch like you will if you're a
data engineer
data Engineers I challenge you guys to
download the raw data which is on this
page right here you just hit data folder
excuse me this data set is actually a
pain but it's a clean one right it is
taking a long time to clean it for you
guys right
um what's the link to the page you're on
if you don't know the link to the page
I'm on please go to data project Club
because I'm a word that you guys will
not find it so
bookmarkdataprojectclub.com all the
information for the projects will always
be on this website if you're not in the
Pro or the premium tier this will be
your home page for most of you guys I
know some of you guys uh got on the
basic plan inside of heartbeat but to be
honest we're probably not going to be
doing that moving forward
um there's just too many of you guys and
it's too much to match to be perfectly
on
um so I still want everyone to be able
to participate um but I want to reserve
my energy and my contribution to those
who are really stupid about this you
really want to make the most you know
out of this program
um so uh I guess I can put in the chat
as well let me put this in the chat just
in case you guys need right here boom
so
um I highly recommend reading this
previous information this attribute
information learning about this because
someone else said for data science role
we only have features but no labels in
the CSV link
um do we need to download from the data
set website so let's remember that in
data science there's supervised and
unsupervised learning you can do fault
detection as unsupervised you can do
clustering as unsupervised you don't
necessarily need label but that being
said there are labels and I'll add this
in the description a little bit more but
if you read all of this the data set
information the attribute information
you'll also find that there is another
data set called the profile.dxt file and
that profile.txt file
um will have some of the the labels of
what's going on now your job will have
to be to match up to make sure that it
matches the original data set and just
to show you the original data set some
stuff and 100 Hertz some stuff and 10
Hertz and some stuff in one Hertz
so if you end up using What's called the
raw data set right here the raw this
thing is Pretty Tough it's pretty tough
to clean this data
um it's pretty difficult
um so no it's not missing labels you
guys just have to go find labels
yourself they're just right here in the
Parent Directory
um um oh wait maybe they're not right
here
wait sorry that's where it's not it's uh
in the data.zip you open up the data.zip
let me see if I have it downloaded and
it easily find it will play
so it'll look like this
you have this profile that has this data
right here and you will have to match up
this data to the clean data set I
already gave you
if you want to use it right that's
that's up to you so that profile is
explained more in detail right here this
is where you'll learn all that stuff so
um be perfectly honest if you haven't
landed your first day at a job yet I
don't really recommend doing the data
science film this is a pretty Advanced
topic I'm just being honest I'd probably
stick to the data
now um put any questions if your data
data scientists put them in right now
all right
um I'm happy to take those we're gonna
move on to data engineer prompt okay as
a data engineer this is the pump I feel
less confident in you know I've actually
worked in my life as a data analyst and
a data scientist you know I've done
those tasks in my life I've never
officially had the title of data
engineer I did help teach data
engineering and MIT but I didn't come up
with the curriculum so I'm being
perfectly transparent with you guys and
I'm probably the least experienced as a
data engineer and so this is the prompt
I came up with but you guys are free to
change these prompts to whatever you
want you can you can do whatever you
want with this project so if you have a
better data engineering problem feel
free to tackle that or feel free to
share it with me maybe we can add it to
this description right if you want to be
a data engineer or if you're trying to
or if you're trying to be better data
engineer you're going to be tasked with
creating a uniform combined version of
this data set so I actually cleaned this
data right here and I mean I did an okay
job cleaning it I didn't do the best
it'll be good enough for you guys to do
your projects and the insurance data
Engineers you'll spend more time on this
and do a better job sitting at night so
you'll have to transform all the text
files because when you get this data set
go ahead and download this data set just
so you guys can see it
all right so here's this data set this
is what you get
actually I'll just show you right here
this is what it gives
you just get a bunch of text files so
for instance PS1 stands for the pressure
of the first sensor and you just get
this text file
now notice that this is actually uh it
has rows and columns so this is actually
dick
um Brown I think it's his name point
this out this is actually a tab
separated file so you can read this in
as a tsp instead of a CSV
um and I think he pointed out was the
columns are for the amount of hurt so
for example if you have a data set that
has
confines that has 100 Hertz versus 10
Hertz this Hertz is basically how often
the data point was taken per second
I think this is one per second this is
10 per second right here and then this
is a hundred percent so each one of the
sensors has different you know
measurements and so you have to decide
how you want to deal with that right so
as a div engineer your job is to deal
with all of these different text URLs
and put them into one CSV and one single
data and actually you should probably
include the profile uh data as well that
would be my suggestion it would be to
also include the where did that go
your profile that's EST which explains
okay I'd probably add that your job as a
data engineer is to take all of these
text files and put them into one scene
speed and one SQL database and if you do
that pretty quickly let me know because
your your CSV might be even more useful
or better than mine so we can maybe even
use yours the community can users so you
can download all the raw data here and
clean all that data put it in one usable
format and make it look really clean
so that is your task as a data engineer
now we've covered data analysts data
scientists and data Engineers prompts
I'm going to go ahead and pause what
questions do you guys have let's go
ahead and take on some questions make
sure it all it all makes sense for you
guys
all right
let's take on some questions
let's see
how are the teams formed okay so if
you're inside of the program that's a
good point so if you're inside the
program we're going to assign teams on
Monday so if you haven't joined the
program it's not too late if you haven't
joined the program go to
datapreagerclub.com click join club and
join the pro or the premium all right
this is where you'll get assigned teams
if you're inside throwing premium in
order to have you go here
I'm really manually going teams actually
heartbeat we'll we'll assign the teams
for us to be really fun down the road
for this first one I'm probably gonna
manually doing it do it so um I'm
actually going to have you guys
um if you're inside the club I'm going
to bring you up to talk right here and
we're gonna say team matchmaking
okay so we're gonna do right now
actually why not
um can everyone comment whether they
it's calling
all right we'll say one if you want a
team member
or not
uh we'll say what are the things
you want
to be part of a team we're not two if
you are doing
the oh wait you guys can't see let me
share my screen
data analyst create a scientist or data
engineering
prompt
and we'll also say
um
time zone
so we need to pay in order to join the
team part yep so so if you want me to
assign your teams you have to be inside
the program if you want to do your
team's online or whatever with me that's
no problem
let me facilitate members you have to be
inside
um and you have to be on the pro or the
premium tier
all right so I'll go ahead and post that
um
any other questions you guys have about
that
so you guys know this month's project
is all about manufacturing data you can
post this on LinkedIn you can use it as
a badge you can put it as
an accomplishment or something like that
and then these are the three prompts the
data sets and the book club right here
the book club
uh things are like half off it's pretty
good
um and these are the chapters I
recommend I'm gonna have to clean up the
other chapter down here chapter 31. so 1
9 and 31.
all right
um so I hope to have all of you guys be
in the club once again you can
participate for free on on LinkedIn and
all you need to do is basically be
posting about the project submissions
I'll even talk about the calendar let's
talk about dates so everyone take a
screenshot of this
this is the meeting we're having on
April 29th at 11 A.M oh that should say
no sorry
ah my time
uh we're gonna have teammate to sign on
Monday once again that's for pro and
premium members only we're gonna have a
co-working session next Saturday and the
following Monday where we'll be you know
tackling any questions for yourself in
this data set I won't be like in
teaching anything in particular this is
like a big q a session uh that we'll do
for the project and you can work with
your colleagues basically it's a time
for you to think loud block out with
your your team assistant with them
um
oh okay our shows I can't see the club
talk Channel let me just double check
um let me finish this actually and then
on Thursday projects for you if you've
approximately I think 26 days to work on
this project that should give you like
three or three to four Saturdays to work
on it if you want to and then we'll have
a closing ceremony on the 11th or sorry
the 27th at 11 A.M
that's probably that's probably mountain
time again I'll have to fix that right
that is the schedule
okay any other questions you guys have
let me see where arch is at and see if I
can figure that out
um
let's see
project Club
clutch at
at
ah you're right I screwed that up
there we go
uh should be fixed for Club talk I think
yeah I'm not seeing some of the items in
the data project Club in heartbeats okay
let me just double check really quickly
and make sure uh that you guys can now
you guys should be able to see the other
one
what exactly are the co-working sessions
so the co-working session is just we're
going to hop on a zoom call and I'm not
teaching anything but if you have
questions you can ask the question just
give me a place where everyone's gonna
hop on a call and you guys can work
together on this it's like it's like a
we're blocking the time on your calendar
to work on this project
together and um
um okay what other questions do we
so you have any more questions
let's see where'd the pro members be
able to see projects from other teams
yes and we'll Spotlight projects be
shared with anyone oh that's a good
question we will you won't be able to
smell the all the submissions
um inside of heartbeat if you're on the
pro or the Premium plan and
um we will we will have a prize I didn't
even mention the prize you guys the
prize for this month uh is going to be
three free months of the project all
right we're gonna do three free months
of the project Club
um and that's going to be
um given to anyone the team that wins
okay we only have four more prizes
probably like a fast funniest I don't
know well it's probably three different
prizes
um but we'll do it for that for the
winner
winter team that could be a solo or it
could be a team
it's a good question can a person who
join as a basic member upgrade to Pro
yep so uh the basic membership so if if
this has been a little bit confusing
okay so and I apologize I didn't know
exactly how this was gonna go but um we
used to have three okay so if you went
to dataprojectclub.com there used to be
three tiers there used to be
the pro the basic plan Pro Plan and the
Premium plan and the basic plan was free
I know a lot of you guys joined on the
basic plan which is free now the the
three benefits are still going to be
there the three benefits everything I
listed as a feature inside of the basic
plan is still going to be included and
it's just not going to be on heartbeat
it's going to be on the website okay
um heartbeat's just expensive and it's
honestly a little bit too busy for my
liking with so many people we have 997
of you guys in inside a heartbeat and
it's just a little bit too many people
um so for for me to manage by myself
so we're still going to do the you can
still participate for free everything I
had on the free plan the data set
it's right here the data prompt it's
right here the badge it's right here the
the calendar it's right here the live
call you're on the live call the book of
the month it's right here so
everything's just going to be on the
website it's not going to be an
important if you are already in
heartbeat you're already a basic member
um your page should look like let me
pull up what it should look like
and
um let me see
it should look like this okay if your
basic member should like make this so
you'll have access to the book club the
project of the month
introductions stuff like that okay
you'll be able to see see that stuff
um but like for example if you want to
become a pro tier just click on this hit
unlock now and you'll have the choice of
upgrading to Pro or premium right here
okay
so that's how you can join if you're
already inside the program if you're not
inside the program just go to
dataprojectclub.com and you can click
join club and choose from here and that
will take you to
make sense
what other questions do you have
prizes yep we will we will have a like I
said three free months of the club
um and we might give away some books I
haven't I haven't really just had it
we'll probably have three giveaways
um so yeah good question
all right any other questions you guys
have let's let's talk we can it can be
about project club uh like the data set
it could be about logistics any of that
stuff
thank you
any more questions feel free to ask them
now I need to make sure that all of you
guys who are on Pro and premium have
access to see everything that you should
if you can't see something that you
think you should be able to
um let me know and I can upgrade I can
figure out how to fix that basically
let's see
I think all of you guys should have
access
yeah
okay
any more questions feel free to put them
in the chat and we'll take him on
how do I get to the website I'll send
you a link it's just dataprojectclub.com
can we join a team without Pro nope I
mean you can I'm just not going to be
I'm not going to be
um
assigning you a teammate you can find
your own teammate if you're not on Pro
or premium you're still welcome to enter
the the submissions in your work it's
all going to be on LinkedIn
I can't see introductions project of the
month and booktube
um
oh
Dan I think you're unique because
I'll add some stuff that will make it
work
s uh
yeah okay if you're a D.A member
some of that stuff would be a little bit
off
actually
all right
uh will this live be available after
it's done yep you can go to my YouTube
channel Avery James Smith on YouTube and
we'll go from there
okay Dan I think I fixed it all for you
any other questions you guys have this
will be on on YouTube for the time being
all right well if uh if you're inside
the program
um make sure you go to the uh project
chat uh what is it Club park I think and
we'll make sure that um we get some
teams uh assigned and uh we'll go from
there those teams will be formally
assigned by Monday so make sure uh you
you go in there on Monday and uh or by
Monday we'll go from there and
um yep
what are the skills necessary to have
this month's project
I feel like we covered that a little bit
um but it really just depends if you're
doing analysts I'd say you have to know
some sort of a dashboarding tool if
you're doing data scientists you have to
know probably r or python or SAS if
you're doing data engineer uh probably
Sequel and or python
good question
yeah
all right you guys I'm excited for you
do any of my Pro or premium members have
any questions
Avery the DS project seems pretty
challenging is it my impression it's as
easy or hard as you make it
um like it's it's really up to you if
you don't know how to do unsupervised
change or fault detection then yeah it's
probably pretty hard
um
like if you don't know how to do yep
before we filled up your sleep link are
you ready to defeated once the baby
comes uh you know what's funny is my
wife you guys didn't know my wife and I
are expecting our first child our dude
it was actually yesterday
um baby's not here yet so we still got
maybe till Wednesday until the baby
comes but you know what my wife has been
snoring so much that like I have not
been sleeping right now to be honest uh
but I'm trying my best I'm trying my
best honestly
um my wife's been snoring all right this
is this is first but well I've been
storing so much that I start and are bad
and then eventually like at 4am I like
wake up and I can't take it anymore and
so I actually look I have this huge
blow-up mattress right there in my
office and I come finish from like 4am
to 6 a.m on my blow up mattress
another time
best of luck I appreciate it appreciate
it you guys thank you it'll be an
adventure so okay
um with that it doesn't like that we
have too many more questions if you're
inside the club I will be talking to you
guys on Monday and making sure that you
get your teammates assigned you guys can
start the project
um and then I'll see all of you guys in
the Pro on the premium on Saturday the
same time uh we'll do the co-working
session all right
um if anyone asks any questions
um I'd like to know where to put it
because I guess you can go to Dana
project club and put it in the chat
um and ask the question there I hope you
guys have an excellent day I'm looking
forward to working with all of you guys
on this project uh let's go have awesome
projects or do May 25th so don't forget
all right get going on them and I hope
you guys have an awesome day bye
everyone

Title: What is Data Project Club?

Description: Stop being left behind by not building data project.

It can be intimidating to build a real-world data project alone.

But why be alone when you can be with us in the Data Project Club?

Come join me talking about cool Data Project Club, that can help you show your skills, build your project and expand your data network.

üåü¬†Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:
1:00 - Projects Are The Cheat Code 
1:55 - Why data project are your career accelerator?
3:37 - Show Your Skills Ôºû Tell Your Skills
3:43 - Doing data projects is FUN!!!
4:37 - Come join The Data Project Club
5:51 - Practice. Build Connect. 
7:01 - My Bootcamp
7:30 - Data Project Club Perks
10:48 - Data Project Club Tiers


Video Transcript:
doing data projects is a cheat code in
your data career if you have not done
one before or if you have not done one
recently I highly recommend starting a
data project today welcome to the data
career podcast the podcast that helps
aspiring data professionals land their
next data job
here's your host Avery Smith alright you
guys welcome back to another episode of
the data career podcast I just watched
the Super Mario Brothers movie have you
guys seen that yet I loved it I grew up
with Mario I grew up with all the games
I grew up playing Super Smash Brothers
Mario Kart and so I thought the movie
was awesome and I'm gonna tell you why
that movie relates to data projects here
alright so if you've never played Mario
Kart before first off you're missing out
it's basically a car racer game that has
all these different Mario characters in
it and you can kind of play dirty so you
can have these items fall out of the sky
and these items might be able to do
different things different cars and give
you advantages or maybe even
disadvantages one of the best items
inside of the Mario Kart game is this
little mushroom so this little mushroom
falls from the sky and what happens when
you take the mushroom you get very fast
very quickly all of a sudden you know
you might be flooring it inside of your
little Mario Kart car but you get this
mushroom and you get an even bigger
boost and basically projects are the
mushrooms in the data world we take
these projects and it'll accelerate our
career no matter where we're at inside
of the process and if you're like Avery
that was over my head I don't even know
what you're talking about with the whole
Mario Kart thing it's almost like you're
at the airport right when you go at the
airport there's these moving walkways
it's a really long treadmill right and
you're going in the airport you're
walking in the halls and all of a sudden
you hop on that thing and all of a
sudden you're taking off you're going
fast you're going faster than the other
people who are you know to left or the
right of you who aren't on that moving
walkway and that is the same thing as
what a data project can do for your
career now let's talk about why that's
the case why are data projects so good
for accelerating our career one is it's
realistic you know it is one of the most
realistic ways to learn it's actually
like you're trying to solve a real world
problem and that's where real world is
like right you're just trying to mimic
what you would do in real life and just
practice that you know how do we get
better at anything in life we have to
practice if we want to get good at doing
data analytics we have to practice doing
data clicks and we should practice it in
the most realistic way possible I've
told the story before but you know I
grew up playing soccer since I could
basically walk age three until I was a
sophomore in college so I even played at
the Collegiate level and I love soccer I
always got better every time I played
soccer you can do little like made up
drills like juggling right juggling is
just like when you keep the ball in the
air with your feet or maybe you do some
cones and do those help you sure but
they're not really game realistic you
know never in my life in a real soccer
game that I start to bring the ball up
out of the air and keep it in the air
juggling or I never dribbled around a
cone in a real game in my life right so
in order for me to get better at soccer
I had to practice realistic soccer
things that meant doing scrimmages
practice shots practice passes those are
the things that actually made me better
as a soccer player and doing data
projects is basically equivalent that
for becoming a better data analyst data
scientist data engineer data
professional in general projects are
also really key for showing your skills
versus telling your skills right you
know anyone can say I know how to jump
50 feet in the air it's not hard to say
that right I can jump 50 feet in the air
but you know if you said that to someone
they said okay show me and that's kind
of where the rubber meets the road like
you have to actually be able to back it
up and so you can say that you know SQL
you can say you know Tableau you can say
you know python but can you back it up
can you show me your skills instead of
telling me your skills and that's what
projects allows you to do so not only
are you going to be learning in a
realistic way but that realistic way is
going to be evidence that you can
actually do what your resume says you
can do the third reason to like projects
and do projects is because they're
freaking fun you know actually doing
projects is really fun because you're
basically a data detective and you're
trying to create a cool some sort of
analysis about something you're really
interested in it's something you're
really passionate about and so instead
of just doing a boring exercise that
really has no purpose right you're
actually doing something fun this is
kind of an analogy and I'm not sure if
it's going to work or not but when I go
to the gym like sometimes I'm just like
man I'm just doing all these weight
pushings and it's doing absolutely
nothing how cool would it be if like
every time I did a bench press you know
that to charge my phone a little bit
that would be really cool and really
motivating for me so exercises they're
just kind of like a little bit
repetitive but projects you're actually
making progress and actually having fun
so they're a great way to learn they're
a great way to show your skills to get
the evidence and their fun so really
there's no downside to doing data
projects so because data projects are so
awesome and I enjoy them so much I'm
starting a club it's called the data
project Club you can go to
dataprojectclub.com or you can click the
link in the show notes down below and
that will take you there to learn more
about it but basically it's exactly what
the name says it is it's a club where we
do data projects now what is this club
actually let's first talk about what
it's not this club is not for beginners
okay it can't be for beginners but it's
not a boot camp if you want to boot camp
go check out the data analytics
accelerator where I'll teach you
everything you need to know to land your
first dated job this is for people who
have already gone through some sort of a
boot camp or a master's degree and they
want to practice their skills they want
to build their portfolio they want to
make data friends those are the three
things we're going to be be working on
practicing our skills making data
friends and building our data portfolio
so notice I use the word practice there
we're going to be learning of course as
we go but really this is about
practicing and learning as we go this is
not learning from scratch so there's not
going to be a ton of guided learning you
will have teammates and you can learn
from them and I'm going to do a live
session every month where I'll be
teaching you one you know part of the
project but I'm not going to be teaching
you how to do this project from A to Z
you'll have to use the skills that
you've learned previously or your
teammates to help you go through this
different projects like I said the three
things we want to do is practice our
data skills build our data portfolio and
make data friends those are the three
things we're going to be working on
because every month we're going to get a
project of the month this is basically a
data set and some sort of project prompt
that will help you get started on what
to do with this data set
using this data set you want to take the
skills you've already learned and apply
them to this data set so if you only
know Excel then you can do the project
in Excel if you know Excel Tableau SQL
python R you get to choose because in
real life you get to choose and so we're
just trying to mimic real world
situations for you to practice on your
own now also I want to say that this is
for data analysts this is for data
scientists and even data Engineers I
haven't quite figured out how you guys
are going to flow with each other yet
but whatever you do in the data World
you'll be able to apply to this data
project and do something in the data
life cycle that would be applicable and
helpful in your data Journey at the end
of the day you have to be knowing what
you're doing or at least have a teammate
that knows what you're doing or you just
want to be there to learn and to grow
and accept that you know maybe this will
be a little bit over my head but I'm
still willing to go full feed in and try
to figure it out with that said it is
probably for a more intermediate and
more Advanced Data practitioners I
typically will tell my data analytics
accelerator students to do this after
the program's completed inside the data
analytic accelerator we'll learn Excel
SQL Tableau python R power bi and once
you get a feel for that we'll do nine
guided projects together inside the
accelerator and then it's a good time to
go to the data project Club because at
that point you kind of understand how to
do a project you understand all these
different Tech skills that you could
possibly use so it is probably more of
an intermediate to Advanced practitioner
if you want to learn more about the data
analytics accelerator I'll have a link
to it in the show notes down below okay
so we talked about what it's not but
what is the data project Club
well first off we're going to have that
monthly data set every single month it's
going to be a realistic data set that
you can take and do data analysis or
data engineering on with that I'm going
to be giving you some sort of a prompt
that will help you get started I'll
basically act as your boss at this
different companies and I'll say you
know do this with the data or we want to
look at this as a business can you help
us do that so you'll have the data set
and the project prompt with that I'm
also going to be doing live calls during
the month usually between one and two a
kickoff and kind of an ending call where
I'll show you what I did how I approach
this project and help you get started
with that we're also going to have a
competition where we'll take some
different Awards maybe it's the best
project or the best presentation or like
the most creative well different
competitions every month where you'll be
able to win prizes like books or free
opportunities to join the data project
Club we'll also have a monthly book club
that accompanies the data project Club
so the book of the month is going to be
applicable to what we're working on
inside of the project and we can talk to
each other about different parts of the
book that we found really useful we can
talk about certain page numbers certain
paragraphs it's just going to be an
opportunity for us to be reading the
same book every single month it's going
to be a lot of fun next there's going to
be team collaboration so you know in
real life you have to work with your
teammates your co-workers right and so
in this program I'm not going to force
you to work with a team but it's highly
encouraged to work with the team so
you'll be able to have teammates and go
through the real world situation of
actually trying to solve real data world
problems as a real world data team we're
also going to have co-working sessions
so basically we're going to have one to
two sessions a month where it's just
blocked out on our calendar that we're
going to work on the project at this
time we're going to hop on a live call
and it's going to be silent on the live
call but if you have questions you can
ask you know unmute yourself and talk
inside of the live call and ask any
questions you have and we as a community
will be able to help you and support you
and kind of walk you through your ideas
so that way you can kind of brainstorm
as as not only a team but like a bigger
data Community all inside the community
I'm going to be giving you something
called the project write-up guide the
project write-up guide is basically my
eight step suggestions for how you
should actually write up a project doing
a project is hard but even publishing
that project sharing that project you
know this is what I learned part of the
project is often the hardest for a lot
of people you might know how to do data
analytics we might not know how to share
data analytics as well as you maybe
should so writing articles writing
reports making videos demonstrations
that's something that we'll be doing
inside the data project Club kind of the
data storytelling part of you know data
analysis we'll be focused on that a lot
and as a member inside the club you'll
get access to that project prompt or
that eight-step project guide for
absolutely free next we're going to have
community and Community chat and forums
so doing data projects on your own can
be a little trouble sometimes because
you don't know what to do when you get
stuck so we're going to have different
threads different forums different chats
that will help you get unstuck that is
also really key for making data friends
you have the opportunity to network with
literally hundreds of like-minded
individuals who are working on the same
project as you these people can maybe
lead to your next job they can teach you
something new honestly the opportunities
are somewhat Limitless and meeting new
people is always a good thing the last
thing inside the data project Club is
we'll have feedback so feedback is
basically opportunity to get feedback on
your project from your peers or from
experts they'll basically walk through
you know different parts of your project
what you did well what you can maybe
have done better so inside the data
project Club we're going to have three
different pricing tues the basic the pro
and the premium the basic is free
absolutely everyone should join it and
if you haven't joined you definitely
should with the basic you're going to
get the project of the month realistic
data set which means you'll have access
to the same data set as everyone else
you're going to get the project of the
month prompt so that is the prompt that
actually is walking you through you know
what you could possibly do with this
project like what is your actual
assignment inside of the data project
Club you also get access to the one hour
live mini course so I'm going to be
going live once a month you're welcome
to come on that call see what I did see
what the winners did see what some of
the other members of the club did and
just enjoy the community you also will
get access to the monthly book club so
you'll be able to know what book we're
reading as well as have the full
community forum for the book club you
will also get the project write-up guide
the ability to write up projects and you
follow those eight steps is inside the
basic tier you'll get a monthly project
badge which is really awesome you can
post that on LinkedIn and you'll have
the ability to be part of the data
project Network so pretty awesome for
the basic tier moving up to the pro tier
you get everything we just talked about
inside of the basic but you get full
Community Access this means you get
access to every single Channel inside of
the community platform which is pretty
much like slacks a picture of really big
slack group you'll get access to
everything inside of that you also will
get access to the recordings of the
lives and every single previous project
so not only inside of pro will you have
this month's project but you'll have
last month's project in the month before
that the month before that all that good
stuff you're going to get all of the
files that I use inside of the project
so any code files any Tableau files any
SQL scripts I'm going to give that to
all of you and you also will get project
teammates so I will assign you matching
teammates that you can work with for the
duration of the month so you can
actually collaborate this is a real
world situation where you're kind of not
choosing your teammates you're getting
assigned them and it's a good
opportunity it's going to be harder but
it's going to be better okay you also be
able to come to those co-working
sessions that will do once or twice a
month where basically we're going to all
be on a call together and if we have any
questions we can ask one another
that right there is the pro tier and
that is 19 a month then we'll have the
premium tier the premium tier is
everything that the pro tier has but
basically you get a little bit more
extra access some of the access includes
expert support and expedited support so
if you have a question me or my team
will be able to answer your question a
little bit faster you're going to have
premium teammates so that way we can
make sure the teammates you know if
you're in the premium tier you'll have
premium to your teammates you'll get
access to the data project Bible which
is basically an e-book that I wrote
about everything about projects and
portfolios that I know that usually is a
hundred dollars so you guys can join the
premium you'll get that included for
this the lifetime of your subscription
you also will get expert feedback on
your projects this means me or a member
of my team will be looking at your
projects individually and giving you
detailed feedback on what you could do
better and what you could improve so
there you go that is 49 a month but you
guys can join all any of those with a
coupon 25 off so the first 50 members of
the club will be able to join with 25
savings and that savings applies for the
duration that you're inside of the club
which is absolutely awesome that means
that you know it applies this month next
month forever so this is a great deal
for the first 50 members inside the
program so be sure to click on the
description in the show notes down below
that you can click on the link
dataprojectclub.com and sign up this
platform is hosted on Heartbeat by the
way if you've never used heartbeat
before it's very similar to slack or
Discord but just a little bit easier to
use a little bit easier to join and a
little bit more features so inside of
heartbeat you're going to have lots of
different channels some of these
channels you'll be able to access inside
of the basic some you'll be able to
access inside of the pro and some you'll
only be able to access inside of the
premium this is the place where we can
basically talk to one another ask each
other questions do different votes on
what we want to do or when we want to
meet this is an opportunity that you can
also Network and email other people
like-minded individuals who are going
through the exact same process as you
and have the same interests as you
heartbeat is completely free you can
access it on your desktop your browser
or your phone and it's a really clean
app I'm really enjoying it so far okay
so that is everything that I have to say
about the data project Club you can join
once again a dataprojectclub.com and you
can check out using code 25 off to get
25 off the lifetime of your membership
so I hope to see you inside the data
project Club once again you have until
April 30th to join for this first month
you have until that day to use 25 off at
checkout to get 25 off that is limited
to the first 50 people who join see you
guys inside of the club

Title: Land Data Job With No Degree

Description: If you find yourself in a situation where you don't have a college degree, I want you to know it is possible to land a data job.

In this episode, Teshawn Black shares his experience landing data contracts at Google & LinkedIn despite having no certifications.

üåü¬†Join the data project club!
https://dataprojectclub.com/


Teshawn‚Äôs Links:
https://www.tiktok.com/@the6figureanalyst
https://app.mediakits.com/the6figureanalyst

Timestamps:
6:29 - Providing value is KEY!
10:49 - We don‚Äôt have tomorrow, so live today
13:43 - Understand what company looks for
17:05 - Learn to communicate effectively
19:14 - Working contract jobs is a blessing
20:17 - Always market yourself
22:33 - Ask the budget first
25:07 - Is job security really SECURE?
27:35 - We are all expendable
29:32 - Focus on data cleaning & data manipulation
30:42 - Don‚Äôt skip Excel!


Video Transcript:
if I can provide value to a company
without having to have tangible degrees
or anything like this is that possible
once I saw that was a door that I could
walk through I started to run and now I
feel like I haven't stopped running ever
since then and I haven't looked back
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith
before we get into this episode I want
to say we're talking about Landing data
jobs without having a formal college
degree now am I saying don't go to
college college is a waste no I'm not if
you find yourself in a situation where
you don't have a college degree I just
want you to know it is possible to land
a data job we've had students go through
the data analytics accelerator and go
from a customer service call Rep to a
data analyst in about three months if
you want to learn more about the data
analytics accelerator you can check the
link in the description down below let's
hop into the episode all right my guest
today is tishon black also known as the
six figure analyst he is a highly
skilled inexperienced data analyst who
has made a really remarkable career
transition from you know customer
service to data analysis with a couple
years of experience in the field and
some really notable data contract jobs
with Global Tech Giants such as Google
and Linkedin tishon has a lot of really
unique experience in the industry he's
committed to helping underrepresented
individuals break into Tech strives to
bridge the gap between industry and
everyday workers by facilitating
opportunities and knowledge so making
some great content on LinkedIn and on
Tick Tock as well t-shawn welcome to the
podcast glad to have you thank you glad
to be here I appreciate the introduction
yeah no problem so we want to get to
know you a little bit better so help the
audience know a little bit more about
you feel free to introduce yourself and
tell a little bit about your story yeah
for sure so for those of you who don't
know me my name is tashawn black the sex
figure analyst and essentially like
Avery said I transitioned from customer
service I actually started off being a
finance intern so I was a quality
assurance intern and went through a lot
of different Finance roles ended up in
customer service and condo Landing a CSM
role which kind of introduced me into
the world of data understanding how we
use systems and how beneficial those
systems are to companies and customers
who are clients of certain businesses so
this was like my huge introduction into
the corporate world but after being in
the space for the past four going on
five years now I've you know had the
experience of being able to work for
companies like LinkedIn at Google by
working Tech contracts and seizing a lot
of those opportunities that normally
wouldn't become available through
full-time employment so yeah I'm
definitely excited to dive in and get
some more info out there okay perfect so
let's first start off with what degrees
do you have like I'm assuming you
graduated high school is that correct
that is correct yeah so I have just a
high school diploma I am currently
enrolled in college right now I'm
pursuing my bachelor's in cyber security
and information assurance really I've
been in school part-time for two years
and I've been in school like full time
for another two so actively doing it but
I've always had to work so I immediately
started working as soon as I graduated
high school and yeah this has been the
process for me so you graduated high
school and you're like all right I'm
gonna find a job so you're working these
kind of like customer service the CSM
like you said the customer service
management roles but then eventually you
get this business analyst job at this
Angus Chemical Company before you start
working these contract jobs at LinkedIn
the contract job at Google can you just
tell us quickly how you got into that
that First Data job right here with
Angus as a business analyst
yeah so essentially during my time at
prior before if anybody looks at my
LinkedIn profile coming from Cole Palmer
they're actually owned by the same
parent company so I ended up
transitioning from one world to the next
and I was actually a customer experience
rep but for the manager level and then I
ended up just finding an opening they
had an opening for a business analyst
which was super entry level like I think
I was getting paid like 14 an hour by
being in that role but I understood the
skill sets that it would allow me to
have later on down the line and
understanding the big picture of what I
envisioned for myself so when I took
that role it wasn't necessarily for what
I could make or what I thought that I
was going to be getting paid or trying
to move up it was more so about honing
in on the skills that I wanted to learn
that I knew that I needed in order to
make that jump to the next level and
from there it was all about staying
consistent keeping my head down and
working on tons of projects while I was
there so I feel like that gave me the
introductory experience to be able to
land contracts like in Google
see that's really impactful and I really
want listeners to kind of you know hone
in on this when you're trying to land
your First Data job one of the best
places to get that First Data job is
actually your current company so you're
at this company you are working this job
it had nothing to do with data analytics
but you start using data a little bit in
your job and then you saw an opening and
you were able to transition internally
sometimes when you're trying to
transition into your First Data job you
want to just think external external I
want to work at this company I want to
work at this company but really you
could probably make that transition at
your current company and just go from
one division to another and why is that
easier because one they trust you more
and two you can work directly with the
recruiter or the hiring manager like
they know you you already understand the
company it's like an easy fit for you so
that's one thing I really want to
emphasize is sometimes it is easier to
get that First Data job by transferring
internally so that's what you did you
basically transferred internally and
then from there you still have no
college degree but you were able to land
these contract data jobs I guess at
LinkedIn was the first one so here's the
question that everyone's been dying to
know do you need a college degree to
land a data contract job so I'll speak
from my personal experience and honestly
I think that for everybody that's
listening understanding that being in
Tech or being a tech worker does not
necessarily mean that you are within the
tech industry when I first started off
and I was working within a chemical
company that was Distributing chemicals
and parts and labor so a lot of that for
me was just an understanding of the
scope of the role I will touch on a
little bit and I know we'll speak about
this a little bit towards the end of the
episode but the biggest thing for me was
just being able to understand okay how
valuable am I to accompany and touching
back to what you mentioned as far as
internally growing the biggest thing
that I understood regardless of what
position that I was in was that
companies will mold you if they see that
you are worth the investment a lot of
times people don't understand that
companies are taking a chance on you
they're betting on you they are
investing in you and that 18 or that
twenty dollars that you're getting paid
is a lump sum salary that they have to
cough up to be able to devote that to
somebody that will be impactful for
their company so the biggest thing for
me was understanding where do I hold
value and how valuable am I if I can
provide value to a company without
having to have tangible degrees or
anything like this is that possible once
I saw that was a door that I could walk
through I started to run and now I feel
like I haven't stopped running ever
since then and I haven't looked back so
for me just having a high school diploma
without an associate's degree without a
college degree like a bachelor's degree
or a master's I know a lot of people
listening do have formal education and
don't take this the wrong way when I say
that a college degree is not needed
while it is very much beneficial to have
based on your experiences based on the
industry that you're in and based on
company needs I do feel that there are a
lot of opportunities out there that can
be made and people just aren't aware of
that yeah that's actually like a really
excellent point when I posted that we
were doing this this session live
together we got some feedback on one of
the LinkedIn posts and someone said I
don't feel like this is like something
we should really promote Avril yes some
people can land data jobs without a
degree but that's like the exception
versus the rule and I think that we
really need to emphasize in this episode
that we're not saying a college degree
isn't helpful like it definitely can be
helpful it's just that if you're in a
situation where you don't have a college
degree it is possible and I think that's
what we want to show is it's we're not
saying you don't go to college don't get
a college degree it's just like this
other opportunity does exist
and if you know if it fits to your your
situation you know you're not screwed
you're not stuck you're not like stuck
in a hall that you can't get out of you
can break into Tech like you said
without a college degree does the
college degree help sure I have a
master's degree does my Master's Degree
help sure there's pros and cons to these
different programs and things like that
but the point is if that's out of your
reach or you don't want to do that
there's possibilities open that's what
we're trying to convey does that make
sense exactly exactly and I think the
biggest thing too to also touch on for
me I've always had a personal goal I
believe in something that's called
running a marathon and that anything
that I'm doing right now is my Victory
lap so I've always understood that
regardless of the situation that I was
in coming from a type of situation where
coming fresh out of high school I didn't
have the most money to be able to pick
and choose which university I wanted to
go to or what school I wanted to pursue
but I wasn't going to let that stop any
of my progress moving forward I think
that how you move through difficult
situations determines what type of
person you are and staying resilient and
being able to work through all of the
obstacles and see the brighter side of
it definitely does make all that the
difference so I think that degree no
degree certification no certification if
you have the ability the heart the drive
to want something and you know that this
is something that you want I think the
possibilities are yeah I agree and I
think what you said earlier was really
important if you want to work in Tech
you don't have to be in the tech
industry even right you can work in Tech
in the chemical industry like you did or
you can work in Tech in the energy
industry like I did or you to work in
Tech inside of fashion inside of
Agriculture inside of manufacturing like
we sometimes think that tech jobs have
to be either at Apple Amazon you know
Facebook Google right but there's tech
jobs everywhere and I think sometimes
that's hard for people to wrap their
head around that even though if it's not
like a tech company every company is a
tech company now and they all need data
analysts so I also loved that you
mentioned that was like a really
important part I thought we should
rehash no for sure and you know what I
actually think that as far as how it
goes from understanding what a data
analyst does I honestly believe that
regardless of we're seeing a lot of
changes as far as AI Evolution as far as
chat GPT as far as a lot of different
industry things that were Norms that are
changing were people's jobs and their
careers could potentially be impacted 20
30 years down the road but one thing
that I can say as far as speaking in the
present is that we don't have tomorrow
so live for today so as far as being
within the industry of being a data
analysts I think that is if not the most
important is one of the most important
roles that you can have at any industry
like you mentioned whether that's oil
and Manufacturing whether that's
Transportation whether that's fintech
whether that's working in customer
experience software development any of
these industries all need someone who
can look at data interpret it and tell a
story with it and I think that is what
will separate the difference between a
lot of people that look at it like oh
I'm just cleaning data I'm just pulling
data I'm just do I really have to code
and the biggest piece is really just
being able to explain and understand
what it is that you can do so I think
that's like another huge Point first so
let's talk a little bit more how did you
land these contract jobs so the first
one was with LinkedIn you don't have a
college degree were you working on
certifications at this time or anything
so no industry standard certifications
what I did was I took a chance by trying
to just better myself and hone in on my
skills I took one of the Coursera Google
data professional certifications believe
it or not I was speeding through it if
anybody has taken that they know it's at
your own pace you can complete it and I
essentially was going through and
getting my mind wrapped around what it
was that I was going to be doing even
though I was already a business analyst
one so the biggest thing for me was okay
learning the skills and working on the
projects there's a Capstone project at
the end of the Google data professional
certificate I took that project did it
and believe it or not actually every
interview that I've had I've never once
been asked for my portfolio or to show a
project it's been more so to work on
something that they gave me directly and
see how I interpret that data but yeah
no major industry certifications which
is why I tell a lot of people on Tick
Tock and one of the videos went viral a
little bit people were just like
confused that this is a thing that the
same certification they're seeing online
with 7 000 people that downloaded this
or 10 000 people have downloaded this
and they're working on it that they can
also do that and land a job in itself
while it might not be the biggest big
tech company or it might not be a global
corporate giant there is a lot of roles
out there especially ones that are going
to pay you I really don't know another
job that you can step into and make 70
75k off the bat with no college degree
whatsoever and then increase your salary
by being in the industry yeah it's
definitely a really great career okay so
you're doing the Google search you do
the Capstone but how do you get linked
linked up with LinkedIn how do you find
about about this contract tell us a
little bit more about that process yeah
so the biggest thing for me was
understanding how was I going to land a
role I didn't necessarily know that it
was going to be at like a LinkedIn or a
Google for a contract working through an
agency third party but what I did need
to understand was what it was that any
company was looking for so what I used
to do was go and even though I was
applying like Mass applying to jobs on
LinkedIn what I will also do is go and
look at who the recruiter was for that
specific post or that specific job that
was posted and I will go connect with
that recruiter
network with that recruiter and then
essentially see how I could be a good
fit I would also go and look at the job
description look at what they were
looking for certain skills and certain
requirements that were going to be done
in the day-to-day process and understand
okay how can I effectively do this so
the biggest thing is that I understood
that my competition as far as going
through this career path was going to be
people that were more technically sound
than I was originally stepping in so for
me it was just about being able to
effectively communicate and expand on
how well I understood what it was that I
was going to be working on a lot of
times companies will take a chance for
you and sometimes open that door like I
mentioned I was getting super low pay in
comparison to what my latest contracts
have been but for LinkedIn specifically
I was mass applying going through and an
agency ended up seeing my profile on
dice if anybody is familiar with dice
they're similar to indeed or LinkedIn
when it comes to job postings so they
ended up seeing my profile on there as
far as the certain key technical skills
that I was listening that I had learned
over a period of being in the position
already learning from the certification
in different courses and YouTube work
big plug right here by Alex the analyst
was a huge huge impact on me for sure as
far as going through the YouTube content
and understanding how to work on
projects so when it was time for me to
actually speak with recruiters I'm
thinking like there's tons of people
calling like people are probably already
in the interview process but I was like
let me go for it anyway so I ended up
just being able to explain what I
understood from a customer development
standpoint and a customer success
standpoint when I actually landed that
contract that LinkedIn it was a data
analyst role but it was a customer
success analyst so it made it easier for
me to be able to transition into that
role because I had already had customer
service experience not to mention being
a business analyst level one for a few
months but I would say when I landed
that contract that was probably if I'm
not mistaken I believe that was like
October of 21 2021 and this was two
months after I had completed the Google
certification so it felt like a huge win
for me and my I think it was a big win I
want to like hone in kind of on
something you just said you know on your
data Journey you may not be the most
technical person on planet Earth you
might not be the best at Tableau you
might not be the best at sequel but
guess what the best people the best
technical people do not always and land
the best jobs like your technical skills
are just one facet of a portfolio of who
you are and so there's people out there
who are less technically skilled less
technically gifted than you who are
landing a job over you because they're
willing to put in the work to show
themselves off to Market themselves to
make LinkedIn posts who have a portfolio
to send cold messages to recruiters and
so I love what you said that it's
basically like I'm not the most
technical person on planet Earth there
was probably better qualified technical
people but I made a connection with
someone and that made the difference is
that kind of what I understood
definitely for sure and also I think
just being able to have that
communication of being able to explain
what it was that I already knew and
being honest and being upfront about
what I didn't know but what I had an
interest in a lot of times during
interviews that I've had and contracts
that I've worked if it comes to a
specific skill like I remember at one
point I had no idea how to use SQL and
it was like a big thing for me like
using SQL as far as in a day-to-day
scope of the role and I was like I have
no idea how to use this but I have an
interest I had already been the learning
R in school I had already been learning
python as well like during my curriculum
so I was like this is something that I
can learn and I just haven't had that
experience so after going through that
process a recruiter reached back out and
they're like you know what we actually
want to see how you perform I have moved
on to the next stage I ended up getting
a take-home project where essentially I
had to perform the work and provide
value for what they were showing me I
can't say specifically what it was but
anybody that goes through any project
stage of an interview process knows that
if they give you a take-home project you
usually have about three days or two
days to turn this back over and it's
usually within side of excel so being
within customer experience and customer
service I had already had tons of
Microsoft Office experience so being
able to hone in on Excel and be able to
go deeper into vlookups into pivot
tables into creating visualizations
within Excel that was the introduction
of showing hey I can do this I just
don't know specifically going through
that process they definitely took a
chance on someone who they thought would
be a potential fit and I definitely feel
like I gave great impact to that yeah
communication is really key that's one
thing that actually you know and the few
interactions that you and I have I've
always thought that you've actually
you're actually a really good
communicator so if you can get that
across to someone quickly in an
interview process I think that goes a
long way okay Switching gears here a
little bit so sometimes I have students
or I'm working with people and they're
like I'm a little nervous about a
contract job can you just walk us
through what your experience with the
contract job was like did they treat you
well do you feel like there was any like
Shenanigans like going on or was it all
good yeah I'm not gonna lie I feel like
working contract jobs has probably been
one of the biggest lessons that I've
ever fallen into I think that a lot of
people will get misconstrued with The
Narrative of oh you don't give benefits
as a contractor oh are you not directly
employed through the company but I think
that being able to work on projects and
a collaborative effort to be able to
efficiently show hey even though I
didn't work directly at Google I worked
the contract there and this is what I
did during my time there just to be able
to show how how well-rounded you are and
your role and this goes for any industry
that you're in just looking at it from a
broad perspective
agency is a third party recruitment so I
look at agencies like they are the
middleman between you and your next
opportunity when you speak to a
recruiter regardless of agency or not
but specifically for agencies you should
always treat that's the first interview
this is essentially the call that
they're going to go through they're
going to look at your experience they're
going to talk with you about the role
and see if you might be a potential fit
you should be selling yourself so the
biggest thing that I've always told
people is you need to be selling
yourself even if it's not salesy sell
yourself you should be explaining why
you believe that you will be as
impactful compared to the next candidate
so going through working with multiple
agencies actually have benefits through
their agency that you can opt into 401K
Health Vision dental and still be able
to get all those great benefits aside
from a retirement account maybe
depending on what the agency is the only
cons to working with the agency that I
personally feel is for one is lack of
job security if you're working a
contract the biggest thing is that you
could probably see a contract that is 12
months with a possible extension if you
work the 12 months and then you end up
getting laid off or the contract just
ends or whatever might happen a lot of
people will be like oh like now I'm
unemployed but while there might not be
a lot of full-time roles that are
opening up especially during a lot of
what we've seen with the tech layoffs
and a lot of what's been happening with
Mass Tech layoffs it's still become
available because they don't have to put
so much in to get an employee to come
work for them so understanding that and
understanding that essentially they're
still just looking for someone that's
going to be valuable to the company for
a specific period of time it's like
taking advantage of that you have to go
and take advantage of that because I've
seen people get converted on contracts
where you know being one or two months
in you thought you were going to be on
contract for 12 months and now you have
a full-time employment at Microsoft or
at whatever company that you might be
aiming for specific quickly so I
definitely think that
for pros it's better opportunities and I
hire earning potential because for me
when I was working a lot of like
full-time roles you can negotiate but I
found that it was easier for me to
negotiate contracts than it was
full-time employment because like we
mentioned not having a college degree in
negotiations for a full-time employment
world where I already didn't have
experience wasn't going to allow me to
get where I needed to be but coming on
contract I learned something and the
reason I learned this was one day is
because somebody who's in the industry
they told me they're like next time like
just ask what's the budget don't ask
don't tell them exactly what you're
making in your last role ask what's the
budget and ever since then I have never
been undersold as far as what I got from
a compensation standpoint it's always
been hey what are you looking for
compensation wise and my immediate
response is it all depends on what the
budget might be what would the budget
happen to be or what is the range of
compensation for this role because you
might sell yourself short and definitely
for anybody that's listening if you come
in and you know you're making like 25 in
your last roll don't say that you were
making 25 in your last roll just let
them know that you would like to know
first what the budget is that ideally
you're looking to be within this this
range but you're open to budgets and
that will allow you to be able to assess
whether going with that agency will be
the right pick for you but definitely
was a pro for me yeah I love a lot of
the stuff that you said there I think
one of the best things about contracts
like when you don't have for instance in
your case like the education or you
might not have the experience you know
it's not the worst thing on planet Earth
that you're going to get a contract that
you know is let's say is between 3 and
12 months having that on your resume at
least gives you experience and then from
there you can always go and get another
job if you guys have ever been to one of
my free career data career trainings I
talk about this if you haven't there
will be a link in the podcast episode
Down Below definitely come intend but
one of the things I talk about is like
you have a goal to go from where you're
at to an amazing day to job there's
nothing wrong with taking an
intermediate step like a stepping stone
job that gets data on your resume maybe
it helps you work remote maybe it
increases your salary 10 but having that
for instance even just six months on
your resume is going to make you such a
better Canada it's going to get you paid
so much more at your next job that can
be like a 50 raise or even 100 raise
we've had some students do so there's
nothing wrong with that intermediate
stepping stone job and like stepping
into a contract role even though it's
not necessarily the most secure it's
actually could be good that it's not
secure because as soon as you hit that
three month Mark at your contract you're
immediately worth more money than
they're paying you probably so you can
go get more money some somewhere else so
I'm with you I don't see a whole lot of
cons to these kind of contract roles
yeah neither do I and you know what a
lot of people like you mentioned that
either hadn't been in this industry
people that have been in this industry
but have only been geared towards a
specific sector of what it is of how to
navigate this industry I think that's a
huge thing for me I've actually realized
that most people don't know how to
navigate their career path a lot of
people will follow a very traditional
sense of hey I want to work here let me
go get the formal education I go through
I get it I land this job and then I stay
here and then I retire which is perfect
but then what happens when you get laid
off from that dream job or what happens
when that company closes down or when
they close that location or when they
don't have the finances to have a full
16 member team and they have to make
some budget cuts being a contractor
while you might still get laid off
you'll be able to pick up another
contract immediately depending on what
opportunities are available and honestly
like I've literally seen it I've had to
turn down multiple offers within the
same week leading up to the Google
contract offer where going through that
process was like okay these places want
to pay me this but the contract is
shorter but this one is a guaranteed
12-month contract so I think another
thing is just also knowing when to say
no I think that sometimes people will be
like I have to take this opportunity and
I don't believe in that I truly believe
that if you are seeking a certain role
or if you see yourself moving to another
level or going into the direction of
being a data analyst or a data scientist
or maybe you want to transition to
project management man I think that
going through and understanding first
what it is that you do is one
understanding how impactful you are is
two and then seeing where can you fit
with your personal goals if that doesn't
fit I don't think that you should just
go for it just because they're paying
you sometimes you have to really be
strategic about how you switch jobs or
how you job up yeah for sure I think at
the end of the day job security is a
figment of our imagination it does not
exist the best way you have job security
is by being really good at what you do
and building a really strong Network
that is the only job security that
actually is real I worked for one of the
biggest companies in the world Exxon
Mobil they always prided themselves
they've never done layoffs covet
happened they did layoffs right and so I
thought when I was signing up I was like
I'm in the most you know one of the most
powerful companies in the world I'm
going to be here for years
I only made it about two years and
really it's just because job security is
all about who you are and about who you
know it has nothing or very little to do
with the companies you work at in my
mind I definitely 100 agree with that
too I think that while companies might
say that you know they believe in
company culture and you know that they
love everyone and they wish they could
keep everyone they will not keep
everyone and turnover is bound to happen
at a certain point so that's why I
always preach know exactly how much
you're worth and if you know a company
is not a good fit for you or you see a
potential Decline and the success that
you envision there sometimes it's best
to leave and get up out of there before
you know you be replaced people don't
think that because they're full-time
employees that they can be fired or they
can be replaced the biggest thing I want
to say is that contract or full-time
employment or part-time or volunteer
every time that you sign HR paperwork
and onboarding paperwork you sign
something that's called an at will
clause which says at will the company
can terminate you in fact for any reason
and it doesn't necessarily even have to
be explained to you in that way so with
that being said understanding that
companies can and replace you and they
can get rid of you so quickly just with
the next Talent it could even be AI like
we said earlier but looking at it from
that perspective I would be scared to be
in a certain kind of role where I
thought that I was going to be there
permanently and then fell on hard times
so I always have been open to the idea
of working contracts working with
agencies keeping my network boosted
working with recruiters through Linkedin
actively crawling recruiters even if
they haven't responded back to me just
hey keep me in mind if you see this next
roll opener if you have an opportunity
to come across please keep me in mind
here's my resume let's see if my skills
line up and if you send enough of those
trust me a recruiter will definitely
reach out to you yeah I love that I do
want to say I don't think AIS take the
only way that AI takes anyone's data
jobs is if you don't use AI I don't
think it's actually actively coming for
us okay without going into specifics
here can you just talk a little bit
about what you did on a day-to-day basis
tools were you using what were the tasks
and obviously don't go into depth like
to the point where you can't but
generally speaking like in these types
of roles what type of things were you
doing yeah so ideally a lot of what I
can say as a generalization across all
the roles that I've worked contracts on
as a data analyst is data cleaning I
think that the data manipulation and the
data cleansing process as a whole you
will see that at any company that you
work with so this is data pulling data
cleaning using SQL using certain
companies like for instance Google users
Google Plex Studios which is public for
anybody a lot of these different
softwares will be your data cleaning
even Excel for data cleaning to parse
data to manipulate data in any kind of
way then understanding how to visualize
data I had to then be able to create
graphs create visualizations bar graphs
charts essentially a visual showing that
I was going to show stakeholders clients
Summers or even internal
cross-functional teams what type of
value that we needed to see so for me
like I mentioned starting off early on I
wasn't necessarily using SQL a whole lot
but it was a little bit it in there the
biggest thing that I probably was using
which is one of my strongest skill sets
would be Tableau I think that using
Tableau was almost as easy as using
Excel and I see I think you put a post
uh not that long ago asking people what
their preference was if they could get
rid of one what would it be and a lot of
people were saying Excel which is crazy
because for that one I think that's a
main key component if you're trying to
become a data analyst if you're already
in this field but you don't know enough
Excel please brush up on your Excel
skills having Advanced Excel skills will
be the difference between you and that
next career jump for you so that was one
of the first things understanding the
entire data process you can go to course
you could take the IBM certification for
data analysts and they will give you a
introspective visual of what it's like
to actually go through this whole
process and how to do it the other
things that I was working on more so
generally but specifically was I've had
experience working within the supply
chain industry as well as working for a
software development for customer
service during my time at LinkedIn that
was a lot of just being able to show
customers how valuable their recruiters
were performing on LinkedIn which for me
felt like a plug because while I was
explaining to them how valuable or how
effective they were using the LinkedIn
platform to find Talent where they were
losing talent to how they could gain
more Talent Etc I was also understanding
for myself how recruiters interact with
potential candidates so I was taking
that very deeply Within Myself it's
looking like the ratio between people
that are sending emails and people that
are actually opening and responding to
it is lower you have more people
reaching out about a job than you have
recruiters responding to messages about
a job so I figured okay I won't put all
my eggs in one basket let me message
every recruiter so that was a huge plus
that I learned from being within the
industry and then the biggest thing too
was because communication skills I think
that having communicate Asian skills was
a super plus for me just being able to
piggyback off of creating a
visualization you might be able to clean
data you might be able to pull it and
know all the technical components like
we mentioned but when it's time to
actually present it you can't do that
and I think that a lot of times that's
what companies were looking for so once
I understood that stakeholders clients
customers they don't care what the data
says they only care about the why and
the answer to their question and really
that's nine times out of ten return on
investment how revenue is generated or
looking at specifics of whatever
industry you might be in during my
contract at Google this was a supply
chain so being able to accurately
forecast products or different materials
that were being shipped out that was a
huge thing because while I can show you
grabs all day long and showings of lines
of information the biggest question is
how did the emea region perform last
quarter or how did the APAC team form
last quarter or how did they look over a
last 12 month period so just being able
to explain that I would say that those
were like the top three most important
things that I have done as far as being
a data analyst and I think that most
people will find that they do similar
things regardless of what industry that
they're in so regardless of you know
Transportation or software development
you're still going to have to explain to
a key stakeholder or a customer or a
client or a higher level upper
management what it is that we're looking
at because since you are the one that is
cleaning manipulating this data and
going through all these different
processes of figuring out what exactly
is behind the ones and zeros they want
to know that answer so that was a big
thing for me and once I understood that
I felt like it allowed me to be able to
understand this career path of data
analysis long term
awesome that's yeah I love it basically
data cleaning data visualization data
communication those are the three things
you do as a data analyst I love it thank
you so much to Sean I appreciate you so
much for coming on the podcast we'll
have all of to Sean's links down below
but make sure you guys go click on those
and check him out thanks so much for
coming on the podcast DeSean really
appreciate it of course I'm glad to be
here and I hope that you know everybody
that's listening definitely caught some
good information because I feel like the
mission that I've made it to break into
Tech and help other people break into
Tech is something that we'll continue to
live on you're doing the same thing we
have tons of creators and people that
have been within this industry that are
showing it is possible to get in and not
have to go with traditional routes so I
think everybody here that comes from
different diverse backgrounds that come
from different educational backgrounds
for listening to this and understanding
that we are all one part of one big data
family essentially I hope you enjoyed
that episode and if you did I'm gonna
have an awesome free masterclass that I
know you're going to love we're going to
talk about a lot of things this episode
talked about you can get it absolutely
for free at datacrejumpster.com training
or using the link in the show notes down
below hope to see you there

Title: How to Build Your First Data Analytics Project

Description: Building data analytics projects is the key to landing your first data job. 

Here‚Äôs a 6-step guide to doing your first project. 

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:
1:43 - Step 1: Deciding What Project To Do 
4:00 - Step 2: Finding a Good Data Set
5:30 - Step 3: Defining the Project 
6:32 - Step 4: Exploratory Data Analysis
9:16 - Step 5: Real Analysis
11:04 - Step 6: Publish the project


Video Transcript:
all right so you've been told that data
projects are key to Landing your next
data job great but how on Earth do you
actually build one you understand how
important they are but how do we
actually do that so in this episode I'm
going to walk you through six steps that
you can use to build your very own first
data analytics project and get on your
way to making a beautiful data portfolio
and Landing that data job so let's get
into it all right step number one is
just deciding what project to do the
first thing you'll need to do is pick a
data topic right pick a some sort of
topic that you're going to be using that
you want to explore that you want to do
but this can be surprisingly hard
because you guys there is so many
options how can we possibly decide well
you have to decide you have to narrow it
down and when I'm building projects I
only choose a topic from one of the
following two categories either a a
topic that is related to a job I really
want an industry I want to move into or
two a hobby that I love something I just
really adore and I would do it for free
if I had to so the first thing I would
do is list all the potential jobs and
all the potential Industries I'm
interested in working in and then I
would list my hobbies so you might be
interested in let's say finance and
banking right so maybe you write that
down or maybe you're interested in
something like working for a music tech
company so write that down maybe a hobby
you have is knitting or maybe it is
running like me I love to run I
basically make a list of two to three
different jobs or Industries and two to
three different Hobbies I have you might
be interested in working in the
construction industry as a data analyst
for Home Depot or maybe a business
analyst for Lowe's and then I would give
other Hobbies like I liked bird watch or
I like to play soccer
next I would pretend that I'm a key
stakeholder in all of those topics
pretend that like I'm the CEO of Home
Depot or I'm the VP at Lowe's and I
would try to put myself in their shoes
I'd ask questions like you know as a CEO
of Home Depot what's stressing you out
as someone an executive at Lowe's what
are you focused on the next one to two
years like how would you want a new hire
to act like what would be useful for you
inside of your company I'd also ask
questions like what do we measure and
how can we improve and I do the same
thing with the Hobbies let's say I said
soccer as a hobby I'd pretend I'm the
general manager of maybe wrexham FC or
Real Salt Lake and I would pretend that
I'm actually a key stakeholder in those
organizations or maybe I'm like a really
Avid bird watcher how could I become a
better bird watcher with the use of data
analytics and I would basically
brainstorm all those different questions
those five different questions I walked
you through for all four of my topics so
that means you're going to have five
different questions four different
topics 20 different answers you're
writing down on a piece of paper and
have that all filled out if you have
that all filled out that takes you to
step two which is finding a good data
set and data projects we need a good
data set and unfortunately no one's just
gonna pop out of the sky and just hand
you a good data set unless you join the
data project Club then that will be the
case but the majority of the time when
you're doing projects on your own that
data will not just be handed to you we
have to go out and we have to find it
we'll have several project ideas like we
just talked about four or five different
projects ideas but we don't necessarily
know the clear winner yet we need to sit
down and see if we can find a good data
set for each of these project ideas and
now there's lots of good places to find
data sets on the internet there's a ton
actually but my favorite place to look
is kaggle that's like my go-to for the
majority of the time so you can go to
kaggle.com go to the data set search
engine on kaggle and search for the each
of our different topics you can search
bird watching or you could search soccer
or you could search Home Depot or
construction whatever and take a look at
the data sets that are available and
pop-up and answer these two questions
number one does this data set look
interesting and number two can I use
this data set to answer some of the
questions that I got from the VP or the
stakeholder or the CEO is this data set
actually useful to the company and if so
then I'll go ahead and choose the data
set and by the way if you want a list of
all of the best places to find data sets
I'm going to have that resource
available to you for free inside the
data project Club so just click the link
in the description down below to join
for free and you'll find that resource
inside of the resources tab of the
community
okay once you've done that once you have
a data set you're going to move on to
step three which is defining the project
a little bit more down and once I find a
good data set I feel like it's a good
fit I revisit the questions based upon
the data that we have I might be
thinking about what columns do we have
in this data set is it exactly what we
thought it might be what are some
interesting questions that we can ask
this data set no I just make a huge list
of all the potential questions and to be
honest there's no dumb questions here I
write them all out like I just
exhaustively try to figure out how could
I use this data set to come up with
business questions and how can I use
this these business questions how can I
use the data to answer those questions
and once I'm out of ideas once I have
about 20 written on the page or whenever
I run out of ideas I'll then Circle the
first three or four I want to start with
these are the ones that I feel would
have the most impact to the company
maybe they're the ones I'm most
interested in solving maybe it would
allow me to use we're going to talk
about this here in a second but maybe it
would allow me to use a certain data
analysis technique that I've been
meaning to practice or technology like
oh this will be really easily solved in
SQL or something like that all right
once you have these three or four ideas
you've clicked you've chosen your
project it's time to move to step four
which is exploratory data analysis now
that we have the topic we have a data
set and some potential goals of the
project it's time to explore the data or
do exploratory data analysis and I
absolutely love this term because that's
what I like to do that's like literally
what I'm supposed to do right now is I
pretend that I'm an Explorer think like
Discovery Channel or National Geographic
like those type of explorers you're
going to go to the end of the Earth in
this case the end of the Earth is the
ends of the data set so this means
knowing what every column means it means
knowing how many columns we have how
many rows we have what a row means all
that good stuff you're going to explore
each column one by one and start doing
basic descriptive statistics
so for numerical columns this means
asking things like what is the Min what
is the median what is the average what
is the max and if you want to make a
visualization of those you could do a
box plot for example then you're going
to ask questions like well what is the
distribution of this data set look like
this column right here you can use a
histogram in that case you'll ask the
question of how does this numeric column
correlate with another that's a really
good chance to use a scatter plot in
that example and let's say you don't
have numeric columns or you're going to
categorical columns right here you might
say what category has the most so like
for example you might have a color
category what color is the most
prevalent you can just do a dumb little
pie chart right here something really
simple if you want to be proper and not
use pie charts you can make it a bar
chart whatever there's lots of different
ways that you could basically show
what's the distribution of different
categories and then you could also ask
this question how do categories affect
different numeric columns so in this
case a bar chart would be appropriate or
you could do one of my favorites that's
not really talked about as much and that
is a b swarm graph so that's basically
some exploratory data analysis we're
just focused on exploring and learning
new things about our data we're just
trying to like see what's out there try
to understand oh maybe this relationship
matches with this oh no maybe this or
that like we're there's no wrong answers
here we're just exploring and we should
come to know the data like we know the
back of our hands know that phrase where
it's I know that so well it's like the
back of my hand that's how well we
should know our data in this phase
so this exploration actually might help
us add more questions to our list right
when people are like do I find the data
set or do I come up with the questions
first the real answer is it's a chicken
or the egg situation where it's which
came first the chicken or the egg and ah
I don't know so we usually come up with
some questions then we find our data set
we go through our data set and that
usually leads to more questions we might
see interesting relationships or find a
unique pattern in the data set that
could lead to key insight and help our
organization learn and grow so once
we've done that exploratory data
analysis or Eda it's time to move to
step five which is the real analysis
kind of a dumb name but we've basically
done the basic exploratory analysis and
now it's time to tackle some of the
questions that we've written down to
generate some key insight for our key
stakeholders and this could happen in a
lot of different ways like this is very
open-ended here depending on what you're
trying to do what the questions are what
your skill sets are all that good stuff
it could be as simple as making some
graphs and generating a dashboard into
below it could be doing some linear
regression and creating a model to
predict outcomes and R it could be doing
a hypothesis test to check for
statistical significance in Python like
it's really just depending on what
you're trying to do and what your
background and experience is this is
where taking different courses for
instance like the data analytics
accelerator is going to get you the feel
of like how to do things in different
situations and there is some skill in
learning what data analysis techniques
to use when you're trying to solve a
business problem it's an art to be
honest and it just comes with enough
practice and enough repetitions one way
to get started by doing these reps is by
doing guided projects because guided
projects are really realistic and before
you start out doing a project on your
own you probably want to do some guided
projects and that's why in my boot camp
the data analytics accelerator I walk my
students through nine guided projects
which ends with a tenth project as their
Capstone project so they develop the art
of trying to tie the business problem
the domain to the data analysis
technique and that is a skill so if you
want to learn more about the data
analytics accelerator I'll have the link
to learn more in the description down
below like I said it can be a lot of
different things it could be a lot of
different tools and once you're done
with the real analysis you might be
thinking sweet I just did my first
project woohoo I did it and
congratulations you have but you're not
done actually there's still one very
valuable step left that you will not
want to forget all right and that is
Step six and that is to communicate your
findings so a data project is not
complete until it is shared if you do a
data project and it sits on your
computer it does not count let me repeat
that again if you think you've done a
data project and you have not published
that project it does not freaking count
you guys if it's just sitting in your
GitHub it does not count if it's just
sitting in your docs file on your
computer it does not count imagine that
in real life if you like did a project
like you did some sort of analysis for
your company and you just never told
your boss or like you never told anyone
about it would that actually help the
company no data analysis for data
analysis sake is dumb we only do data
analysis so we can improve our lives
improve a company get results some way
or another so in real life we want to
reach out to our stakeholders and share
our results with them this might be done
making a PowerPoint or sending a really
well written email but there's lots of
different ways to communicate your
findings in this data project world this
is done best by publishing the project
and there's a few ways to publish the
project we talk about that in a lot of
my different programs but my favorite
way is by doing a data story or
basically an article write-up of what
you did this is basically a fun report
that shares your entire data project
Journey from where the data set is into
what meaningful Insight you uncovered so
it's basically you're explaining why you
did this project why you chose it where
you found the data why the data was
interesting what questions you came up
with what you learned in your
exploratory data analysis what you
actually do with the real analysis how
you did it what the results are and what
the conclusion is and that right there
is a rapid version of the eight step
write-up guide for projects that
basically will help you write your
projects and I have that write-up guide
available for anyone who wants to access
it inside the data project Club so once
again just click on the link in the
description and join the data project
Club for free you'll have that access to
that tool right there I hope you guys
see how valuable doing data projects can
be I hope you understand the six steps
to get you there and you have a better
idea of starting your own data project
if you want to start making these
practice projects with a community join
the club guys it's going to be a lot of
fun you can find that in the description
down below thank you so much for
listening and have a great day

Title: Best Data Visualization Books for Beginners üìö

Description: If you want to learn data visualization, here are the best 5 books you should read.

Get the books via links down below.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:
0:34 - Book 1: Storytelling with Data
1:50 - Book 2: The Big Book of Dashboards
2:51 - Book 3: Envisioning Information
4:12 - Book 4: How Charts Lie
5:14 - Book 5: Show Me The Numbers

Mentioned Links:
üìö Storytelling with Data: [https://amzn.to/3n2rDwJ](https://amzn.to/3n2rDwJ)
üìö The Big Book of Dashboards: [https://amzn.to/42nBmO4](https://amzn.to/42nBmO4)
üìö Envisioning Information: [https://amzn.to/3yN8a5z](https://amzn.to/3yN8a5z)
üìö How Charts Lie: [https://amzn.to/3luqQ77](https://amzn.to/3luqQ77)
üìö Show Me The Numbers: [https://amzn.to/3FxgeuW](https://amzn.to/3FxgeuW)


Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I'm going to walk you through
the best five books to get when you're
just starting out in the data
visualization World I'll tell you what
those books are why you should read them
and where you can get them this is the
data career podcast episode 52. welcome
to the data career podcast the podcast
that helps aspiring data professionals
land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith
if you want to learn data visualization
here are the best five books that you
should read I'll have the titles and
links to each of these in the
description down below number one is
storytelling with data now storytelling
with data by Cole mathlik should be your
first read in the data visualization
world it is a complete beginner's guide
to data visualization for all business
professionals the author Cole Netflix
who I've talked to before she is awesome
she taught data visualization at Google
just like a little company right and now
she has her own Consulting practices
where she teaches dozens of companies
data visualization best practices she
actually came and spoke at Exxon Mobil
when I worked there as well and it was
really good she knows her stuff so in
this book you'll get a complete
introduction to how to make beautiful
data visualizations and one thing that's
really nice about the book is it's tool
agnostic meaning that you can take what
you learn and apply it to any software
that you want she's not going to teach
you Excel she's not going to teach you
power bi she's not going to teach you
Tableau but stuff that she teaches you
will be applicable to all of those
different softwares which is absolutely
amazing and I really prefer that she'll
walk you through complete visualization
makeover step by step like here's a bad
date of is and here we are turning into
a good database and why the techniques
that she's teaching are really effective
it's an amazing book and you definitely
want to check it out alright number two
is the big book of dashboards now this
book is awesome for anyone who wants to
improve their dashboard design the
authors Steve Wexler Jeffrey Shaffer and
Andy cochrave are data visualization
experts and they'll teach you everything
you need to know about building an
efficient dashboard I really like this
book because they have good theory at
the beginning about how to build
dashboards what a dashboard is and why
it's important but then they dive
straight into 28 practical examples
spanning all sorts of different
Industries all three authors will give
their thoughts on the dashboard and walk
through the different thoughts they have
on why this dashboard does well with
this or why it doesn't do well with that
or what they would change and they even
give you access to some of the real
Tableau files that they use to make
these dashboards that you could actually
use yourself as a template for your next
dashboard so if you've already read
storytelling with data it's time to move
on to the big book of dashboards and
this book should be your next purchase
number three is envisioning information
This Book Is by The Godfather of data
visualization Edward tufty and tufty is
seen as the leader the guy in the data
visualization space he's been around a
long time and he's written five books on
the subject I think that kind of makes
you an expert doing information is my
favorite book although I've read all
four I guess not the fifth of his books
and they're all amazing at this point in
this discussion we're no longer at an
elementary data visualization book level
because this book is a little bit more
detailed and a little bit more advanced
but I really love it because in this
book he teaches really cool Concepts
that not a lot of people talk about like
what's the difference between macro and
micro readings what are small multiples
and how to use them he goes very deep
into color and how to use it
professionally and also he covers how to
visualize space and time which is like
an amazing part of the book and you
don't want to miss it the contents of
this book are absolutely amazing but
it's also a really beautiful book like
it just looks amazing on the inside it's
very clear he spent a lot of time
designing the layout of the book just
like you should spend a lot of time
designing the layout of your different
data visualizations each page in this
book has room for notes which I
absolutely love and I took a lot while
reading it number four is how charts lie
how charts Lie by Alberto Cairo is a
great book for any data visualization
beginner it's one of the first ones I
read when I was starting my journey it
covers how most people or a lot of
people or some people mainly the media
will use charts to illustrate a message
that isn't entirely true we talked about
a couple different examples from both
sides of the alley he shows some CNN
graphs he shows some Fox graphs he shows
some graphs that Trump used it's really
interesting and he gives these real
world examples from these organizations
it's amazingly compelling and he'll walk
you through step by step why these
graphs are misleading and how he would
fix these graphs to make them more
truthful it's just a master class on all
things data visualization because it
also exposed me to a lot of different
chart types which was really fun help me
know when to use them and how to use
them effectively so I highly recommend
it it's also a pretty quick read too
it's not too thick and it's pretty fun
to read number five is show me the
numbers show me the numbers is thick I
mean just look at this thing it is chock
full of all sorts of amazing data
visualization tips it's by Steven few
another really big expert in the fields
I really enjoyed this book because it
spends an inordinate amount of time
talking about designing tables yes
designing tables like rows and columns
like a basic table he explains it for
chapters on chapters in this book
and it's so detailed it's not actually
really talked about that often but
tables are really the most common form
of data visualization so it's important
to know the best practices when you're
actually building them so you can make
these tables look really good and be
very helpful for your user so I actually
use this book a ton in a recent
consulting job I had with a Fortune 500
company and this company was really
struggling to get users to read and gain
value out of this big report this like
multi-page report it was mostly tables
and their tables were ugly so by the
principles I learned in this book we
implemented 18 core table principles and
built out a new table design for their
software that hopefully is leading to a
lot more user engagement
he also covers graphs color use and best
color principles honestly this feels
like a textbook it's very detailed it is
a little bit more on the intermediate to
Advanced side but still a great book and
would teach you a lot of the basics so
there you have it the five best books
for data visualization beginners I'll
have all the links in the description
down below so you can check them out I
hope you enjoyed that episode and if you
did I'm gonna have an awesome free
master class that I know you're going to
love we're going to talk about a lot of
things this episode talked about you can
get it absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: From Teacher to Senior Data Analyst in 100 Days w/ Courtney Ballard

Description: This is the story of how a math teacher transitioned to become a lead analytics consultant at Wells Fargo.

In this episode of The Data Career Podcast, Avery Smith sits down with Courtney Ballard, one of the bootcamp alumna, on how she landed a data job from teaching.


üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:

1:53 - Why Courtney transitioned to data analytics
9:54 - Why it's okay to "start over" 
13:22 - Teachers make great data analysts 
17:44 - How Courtney landed her data job
23:30 - Why data careers are great for teachers! 

Courtney‚Äôs Link:
Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/courtneylballard/


Video Transcript:
this episode of the data career podcast
I talked to one of my former students
Courtney Ballard and we talked through
her data journey of where she went from
high school math teacher to lead data
analytics consultant for Wells Fargo
we'll talk through what a teacher needs
to do to break into the data analytics
field what you need to do to break into
the data analytics field and talk over
some general strategies to do this whole
process this is data career podcast
episode 53. welcome to the data career
podcast the podcast that helps aspiring
data professionals land their next data
job
here's your host Avery Smith welcome
back to another episode of the data
career podcast this is episode 53 which
I'm really excited about we have an
amazing guest today we have Courtney
Ballard who is a Alum of the data
analytics accelerator program so she was
part of my boot camp and now is on the
other side to tell her her story she is
no longer a teacher that's what she used
to do she is a lead data analytics
consultant at Wells Fargo like the
really big bank and she's a former high
school math teacher she is a master
teacher fellow national board certified
teacher and Innovation Grant recipient
of the North Carolina State University
for stem Educators which is obviously
she's a very good teacher basically as
I'm trying to say or she used to be I'm
sure she still teaches informally but
now she is like I said a lead data
analytics consultant at Wells Fargo
she's an Alum of the data career
jumpstart boot camp program that I run
called the data analytics accelerator
and she's an amazing person and a great
guest So Courtney welcome to the podcast
I'm excited to have you thank you so
much for having me
so if you guys don't know Courtney
definitely want to go follow her on
LinkedIn she has some good stuff that
she's sharing but with that intro
Courtney you were obviously a really
good math teacher you know you're
getting a master's degree you want
Awards what made you want to leave
teaching and go into data analytics
honestly it was really tough that's a
really great question because I loved my
students I loved my colleagues I love my
Administration and I know that's not
every teacher's experience and so I've
been teaching for 10 years and I'm gonna
talk to a person who always wants to
continue to grow and to learn and I've
been through accounting cohort for
leadership in my county and like you
said I've received my master's degree in
2020 so fairly recent and I didn't
receive any incentives for that and I
also received my national board
certification nine days before I started
this new job so all of my a lot of our
things were very recent accomplishments
that ultimately I had reached the
ceiling in my profession and there was
nowhere else that I could go if I wanted
to stay in the classroom and I really
wanted to continue to grow to provide
for my family to have selectability and
so I decided to seek options outside of
Education I have a four-year-old and a
one and a half year old at home and so
having young children flexibility was
really important me and coming home and
having the energy for them was really
important to me I often found myself
really over stimulated at school I
working with them but whenever I came
home I was I was exhausted then I didn't
have the energy that I wanted to be able
to give to my family
okay so basically leaving the classroom
is hard you loved your students but for
you the key was I want to keep growing I
want to keep you know earning more I
want to keep rising up and you kind of
hit that that ceiling in the classroom
so you're like all right I need I need
something else but also I want to I want
to do something a little bit different
for my family and for myself something a
little bit maybe less stressful
something that allowed you to have more
energy right okay but what made you
choose data analytics then because
there's there's obviously lots of things
you could have done what Drew you into
data analytics
yeah so teachers use data in the
classroom every day whether it's through
your homework assignment so you're
analyzing that data a lot of us use
digital forms of checking homework and
things like that so I was using data to
drive my instruction every single day
and then I noticed something about
myself that was different from all of my
colleagues like whenever the data came
back from any assessment I was always
like what do they do what do they do you
know and I wanted to see how my students
grew who were underperforming and and I
wanted to help them meet and exceed
those expectations and and so I use data
to drive that becoming interested in in
data analytics and studying more about
it at that time
yeah I think something that you said is
really important is that teachers
actually make great data analysts they
just don't know it yet they've been
using data in the classroom they've been
trying to learn and grow with the data
trying to become better teachers with
the data and they're also fast Learners
and great presenters and great teachers
and you know those are some of the
qualities that you need to have as a
data analyst so a lot of the time
teachers make great data analysts they
just don't know it yet which which I
think is true of you maybe you did know
it but I think teachers can make great
analysts at the end of the day okay so
you were like all right I'm kind of a
numbers nerd I'm looking at you know
these teachers reports some of the
teachers don't even look at the reports
but I'm looking at them I'm interested
in these numbers what they have to say
and you're like all right I want to
start doing this maybe I want to get out
of the classroom what steps do you take
and what advice do you give to someone
who's maybe in a similar place you know
a teacher who's listening right now
who's like I really want to get into
data analytics but I'm just starting out
yeah so I I'm gonna give the advice
first so I'm gonna advise
um everyone who is choosing data
analytics to consider your own Journey
my journey is only one story and there
are a variety of avenues that this could
take and so I want you to remember to
stay open to that Journey also changing
my journey changed in directions that I
didn't anticipate so I would just
encourage you to stay open and remember
that your story will be different than
my story and different than the next
person's story so first I started
researching and considering my passions
my commitments and my desired timeline I
knew that I was passionate about
mathematics and I was passionate about
teaching even and I knew that I was
passionate about
um about data and so I also had some
commitments that I had to consider
because I was in a five-year contract
and I still had two years or a year and
a half left in that contract and so my
desired timeline was okay I'm going to
take this kind of slowly I'm going to do
it in a year and a half and one of my
like strengths from strength finders is
one of my top ones is that I'm a learner
I'm a researcher so I research schools I
researched boot camps and many different
programs and initially I'm gonna go to
UNC Charlotte I learned that they have
like a boot camp it was only you know
six months or eight months I can't
remember and it was like twelve thousand
dollars I was like
dollars for six months what so
um so I was like okay and then I just
you know I thought about it some more
but didn't really take any action
um and then I'll go to the park one day
and learned about Georgia Tech and that
they had a master's degree program and
that I could get a master's degree and
under ten thousand dollars and um and I
attended online information session I
got super excited I was like all right
this is the journey for me I'm gonna
apply I applied I got in and and thought
that was going to be my yeah my key to
my next PATH and I knew that I had the
time I had the one and a half to two
years I wanted to finish a master's and
then do my data analytics
um transition
and then I stumbled across a video from
Avery Smith if you don't know I don't
think you know that's part of the
journey I don't
but I actually the way that I found you
was from your video and actually looked
it up today it's called my review of
Georgia Tech Ms analytics and so that's
how I found you and based on what what
you said um you were saying you know I
mean it everyone's path was different
right and for you the reasons why you
took it or you did that program yeah it
was very very beneficial for you but uh
for me who was just wanting to break
into the data analytics
um it might not be necessary and I was
like all right well based on what this
guy says I don't need to do it but I'm
gonna do it anyway
[Laughter]
and I think I had 20 connections this
was in June
this has been junip last year so just
2022. and so at that time you were doing
30 days to data projects you remember
that I'm sure really busy time in your
life and said towards the end of that
you started sharing about 21 days to
data and I knew that based on the
timeline I was like Hey that will end
right before Georgia Tech starts and
I'll know whether this is really
something that I enjoy and so I started
that honestly I loved it I loved
everything I was learning I loved that
it was quick 30 minutes a day and you
brought me out of my comfort zone to
actually start posting on LinkedIn and I
had never posted before I had had
LinkedIn since like 2018. never never
done one post so I was like okay I'm
gonna do this so I started learning and
actually I've taken a couple of courses
prior to your course but it was just
like skill building courses and this was
more action oriented with building my
network and stuff and the 21 days today
that ended and
then Georgia Tech started that same week
and when I started Georgia Tech
I remember I'm so excited we went to
Atlanta we got the sweatshirt we got the
pictures yes
yes I was like I'm doing this I'm so
excited
um my husband was my cheerleader he was
so excited too
um and I that first week it was okay but
I spent every night I was every night I
was working past midnight the whole
weekend I worked on my coursework
because I was also teaching at the same
time so I was teaching coming home
feeding the kids playing them to bed and
working the rest of the night and and
then I was like oh my man this is going
to be two more years of my life I just
did this in 2020. I just got up and
that's great and oh my goodness I don't
know if I can do this again and so I I
decided that
after two weeks of doing that I was like
that I don't want this life I I do want
the life after I do want a job in data
analytics but I don't want this life for
the next two years while my kids are
really young and maybe I'll go back but
but not right now and so I went to my
husband was like I can't do this anymore
I want to do something different and I
said if if I stopped tonight will you
let me enroll in the in Avery's boot
camp
and and you're like
of course like right I support whatever
you want to do like I actually got most
of the money back it was only 12 percent
in okay but my experience there was
there were 800 people in the class okay
this is another thing and there were 20
Tas and if I had a question I was
expected to post it on the discussion
forum and read through responses from
800 people or 20 Tas and try to find my
answer and I was like this is so
overwhelming that it just wasn't the
past for me and when I joined your
course very shortly after that I met
with you and we created a road map and I
was looking at that road map actually
and you asked me some of these same
questions and you're like why are you
learning data and I said well data it's
and another thing was that I wanted to
have less side job and build a bigger
margin as a teacher
I don't know many teachers that just
have one job and I tutor because I want
to now actually I tutor because I want
to but not because I have to and while I
was teaching I had to tutor to to
support my family and so that was part
of it too I wanted to be able to give
that time back to gain that time back
with my family and so my personal
roadmap part of that was to post my 21
days today to private because I still
had not faced with it even though I had
finished it and I had what is called
Perfection paralysis
and I would not post because I didn't
think it was perfect and nothing is
right but we were like okay Courtney
first thing you've got to post your
project you already have it written
you've got to post it so I posted it and
then I set up my portfolio I did the
teacher section of your course and I
even from that created my own teacher
project and you can see that on my
LinkedIn yeah with like your own space
data right yeah yeah yeah yeah with
multiple States
yeah and um and updated my LinkedIn
tuned it up
um
and and yeah and did a couple more
projects so
I
I don't know I think I covered
everything there but there's a lot more
and process updating my resume my cover
letter and making sure that my resume
had specific thing this is something
that I kind of wanted to touch on was um
translating your resume to business
terms and I think it's important to talk
about how teachers are relationship
managers how teachers are change
managers how teachers are Risk Managers
in data even we are relationship
Builders we have to go from the data to
the partners and present this data in a
way that makes it understandable to them
so we have to be able to build
relationships with those Partners so
that they trust us and that they trust
that the data that's coming from us and
we do that as teachers we're constantly
building relationships and managing
relationships with our students with our
parents with our teachers with our
colleagues with Administration even with
other schools within the district change
management so Technologies are
constantly changing and so processes are
constantly changing in the school system
and so I think that it's important event
that teachers highlight that on their
resumes and then also risk management is
a big one that's a lot of the data
industry in managing risk and teachers
need to show how valuable you are in
that space we as teachers are
responsible for identifying and
mitigating safety risks all the time
um creating a safe learning environment
which includes proper storage of
material it's very important in the data
world that you properly store the data
that you don't let it get out and that
you have correct use of equipment and
that you follow safety procedures you
have to follow procedures in the data
world as well and also managing academic
risk there's creating individualized
education plans for struggling students
and managing behavioral Risk by
developing rules and consequences and
addressing issues and so all of these
things teachers do and you can highlight
those things on your resume in the terms
that the business needs to understand
them
yeah I love it I mean I think what you
basically said was you know teachers can
make great data analysts at the end of
the day and they have a lot of the
skills necessary I also liked on your
journey how you test it out to see if
data analytics was for you I think
that's that's an important step and do
you have that road map still I do I do I
have it pulled out on my computer right
now what was the what was the timeline
we put on that road map yes so the
timeline was for apply for a data
analyst job in November
and I jumped again and
[Music]
um I applied in October I got to
Nebraska started I started so I started
my journey with 21 days a day then
September and then started your course
and like late September I think and then
I
I started flying in October at first I
was applying to just anything and
everything there's easy apply on
LinkedIn there's all these different
websites where you can apply to things
and and I was just applying everywhere
and it wasn't really focused and at that
time I decided okay
what do I really want to do I've always
been interested in banking and finance
and so why am I applying to all these
other things so then I married my focus
and Charlotte N is a banking you know
banking is a big industry here and so I
narrowed it down to the two biggest
banks in Charlotte I was like all right
well there's a lot of jobs there there's
a lot of data jobs there so I started
applying to all the data jobs at these
two Banks and surprisingly or I was
surprised I guess that I started getting
interviews faster than I would have
originally anticipated and I got offered
my first job in November
and and started I started my role now in
December 19th if you joined 21 days data
in September that's about ends up being
around a month-long program at the end
of the day so that means you're you
start in September you join the big boot
camp in October and then you do do you
do the big boot camp October
and then you have a job offer in
November right right
okay so we're talking September October
you know two two and a half months from
I'm not sure where to go in this journey
to your first job offer which the first
job offer was a pretty good offer if I
remember right yeah yeah it was a really
good offer and how close were you well
I've been on for the job like I had
talked with the manager I talked with
the recruiter they were like you know is
this yeah we want you you're the one for
this job and this was so this was
November end of the year quarter four
and the business froze while hiring
and but I didn't know this until I kept
reaching out hey what's going on what's
going on and I think they were working
behind the scenes trying to work it out
but Cricket I wasn't hearing anything
but in the meantime I had other
interviews I was I didn't stop
interviewing and I think that's a really
important part of the process I hear a
lot of people they get an interview they
get that job offer and then they stop
they stop everything but until I had
signed the offer I was I kept applying I
kept interviewing and actually had
another interview the following day
after I was offered the job I still took
that interview so interviews and then I
had I didn't have my next interview
until two weeks later and I was like
okay I'll keep it on the books I'm not
going to reach out to them and tell them
that I that I'm not gonna do it and that
was my for my Wells Fargo job so I'm
glad that I didn't yes I I just want to
I just want to emphasize that and more
because I think you undersold that you
guys Courtney he literally had a job
offer in her inbox like literally you
might have even signed it I don't even
know like you were like it was like on a
Friday I remember you told me hey I got
the job I'm gonna like sign it and send
it in Monday and then like Monday came
around and it was like oh the whole
company's on a hiring free sorry like
we're gonna have to not offer you that
job like you had that job right yeah I
had the job I didn't ever actually get
the paperwork and that's when I kept
reaching out about hanging do you have
the paperwork and then they kept telling
like they would say yeah it's coming but
then I wouldn't get it so I just kept
and eventually they told me I'm so sorry
we really wanted you and we were trying
to work it out with the business but
ultimately like safer is hiring and
wouldn't approve it so
I just want everyone listening to put
yourself in Courtney situation where you
spent all this time learning you spent
all this time interviewing and keep in
mind she's a teacher so like doing
interviews is really hard you're like
doing them on lunch breaks or you have
to take like a half day off of school
and get a sub you know to do some of
these interviews sometimes and she
literally like got the email and was
like hey you got the job and then to
have that you know taken away from her
it would have been devastating and I
would have been tempted to give up I'd
be like oh my gosh I'm done like I was
so close but she didn't okay she didn't
like say to Wells Fargo who was
interviewing her in two weeks hey like I
already got a job like she kept going
right and this is one of the things I
remember talking to you about this where
it was like devastating like you
literally had a job and you know as your
coach as your cheerleader I was like
stoked for you and then to have that
ripped away I felt sad and I think one
of the things I said was like well I
believe everything happens for a reason
and you know when God shuts the window
he opens a door or vice Versa and so two
weeks later you interview with Wells
Fargo and the interview goes pretty well
right
yeah yeah it went really well
and you get a job offer oh they had to
do a case study is that what they had
you did yeah so with that job the
process was I first met with a great
career and then after meeting with the
recruiter whether or not it went well
she sent me a project take home project
I said it went well so I got the take
home project I had 48 hours to complete
the take-home project and I
being who I am I've finished it like I
worked like all that night and sent it
in at 9am the next morning and so by
like noon that day they were reaching
out wanting to interview me and I think
I interviewed on
Tuesday of the next week or something
and then by Friday and the next week so
it was about a two-week process in my
interview to finding out and honestly
that's still kind of fast for the
corporate world for what I what I've
learned
it is it is and they offered you offered
you the job and it was it a better or
worse job than the first offer better
like that like a lot better isn't it
yeah yeah I think so you never know but
yeah I definitely think so I think that
it honestly it couldn't have worked out
any better there is on my team someone
who has transitioned from teaching into
analytics and so she's been able to
support me through that process and it's
just it's really cool how everything
works out for a reason yeah yeah and and
now with with your new job you have the
chance because you know going back to
one of the reasons why you wanted to get
into data analytics you were like oh I
have this four-year-old and this one and
a half year old I want to spend more
time with you know fast forward to today
are you able to work remotely at all
yes so I work remotely and I have to
work one day in office a month so yes I
work remotely a lot of people ask me so
do you keep your kids at home no I do
not I do get to spend a lot more time
with my kids I get to go pick them up
whenever I need to and come back home
and finish working and the days that
they're sick I can keep them home and
continue working and it doesn't
inconvenience my co-workers it's always
there's so much with teaching like you
feel so bad when you have to take off
the day to care for your family and and
that just shouldn't be the case but it
just is it's the reality of the work and
I know people have to cover for you and
it can be inconvenient so in this stage
of life it's been so nice having that
flexibility
life's better as a lead data analytics
consultant than a teacher I guess is
that what you'd say
yeah there are definitely perks for sure
yeah it's true it's true out of the
bathroom whenever I need to I can eat
lunch and or take a longer lunch or a
shorter lunch someday so it's a lot more
flexible
yeah yeah I think one of the the best
things about being a data analyst
compared to a teacher is you don't have
to get a sub you know if you go on
vacation it's not like like you have to
find a sub train your sub like our roles
are pretty low stress and the majority
of data analytics roles where it's like
if you're gone a week if you're gone for
four hours it's not a big deal but in
teaching like imagine if you just like
didn't get a sub for a whole week like
that would be a big problem so it's just
yeah I see a lot of ways where it's a
little bit less stressful okay well that
is amazing like absolutely so happy for
you and your family that you guys you
know have less of a commute get to spend
a little more time together get to earn
more you know and enjoy what you're
doing a little bit more I think that's
great do you think it's it's possible
for for teachers to become data analysts
I would Advocate that teachers are data
analysts teachers aren't analysts
teachers are constantly monitoring
student progress they are analyzing test
scores grades classroom assessments and
they use areas of data to to identify
areas where students are excelling and
errors where they need additional
support teachers are using data and
curriculum planning to analyze their
data to inform their curriculum planning
and to adjust their teaching strategies
teachers are using data for program
evaluation they're chanting student
progress over time they're seeing as
their students are meeting benchmarks if
they're exceeding benchmarks and making
adjustments to improve Effectiveness and
ultimately as a data analyst that's what
you're doing you are trying to improve
Effectiveness within your companies and
you're trying to make recommendations
based on that data and so
um
so teachers are data analysts either I
love it or not that's that's awesome I
love it hey I'm a big teachers fan so I
I absolutely love it well Courtney thank
you so much for sharing your story I
want to hear a little bit more about
what you do obviously don't share stuff
that you can't share but now that you're
at Wells Fargo like what tool do you use
the most every day
yes so I use Tableau and Excel the most
every day
and SQL of course in our world we use
teradata which is just another data
management system that and SAS but we
can use prox equal which you could and
so yeah those are the three things that
what I would say is that when you're
hired into any role they don't accept
you to know everything and you have team
members who are there that are more more
equipped than you are and who have
better skills than you are but also you
bring great skills to the table I can't
tell you how
how much my team has said I can't
believe how fast you're like catching on
group stuff or things like that and I
guess it's just because teachers are
constantly learning all the time and our
capacity is really great and so as a
teacher I was used to yeah constantly
new things all the time and learning all
the time and so being able to it just
kind of soak all about it now is like
drinking from a fire hose I think if any
of you have been following me on
LinkedIn you probably saw my one month's
post it was like drinking from a fire
hose and it still is every single day
but one thing that I asked some of my
co-workers I was like hey
um how long does it take for you to feel
like you weren't like a fish out of the
water and more than one gets there and
they all they all have been there for
two or three years the world of data
analytics is not going to
if there's going to be something new
every single day Dana can be messy and
and so no matter what tool you're using
you can always learn something new and
so I'm learning constantly I'm learning
way more stuff about Tableau and about
SQL than I ever knew before I got into
the job but that's what I expected to do
I didn't expect to have all of the
answers I knew that I didn't have all
the answers going in yeah and if you
remember this is something I've talked
about more recently but one of my like
main thesis in my like coaching
curriculum of like helping people go
from for instance teacher data analyst
is you're never going to know it all
like you'll never know it all so stop
trying instead let's just get you the
basics you know like you said Excel SQL
Tableau that's what I teach inside of
the boot camp and then let's figure out
a way that you can get paid to learn the
rest because like I did not cover
teradata I did not cover SAS you know we
didn't talk about that at all but now
I'm assuming you might not know them
perfectly but you know how to use them a
little little bit and and you made a
salary they basically paid you to learn
those things right absolutely yeah and
there's always they they offer tons of
development courses and stuff for free
once you get into most companies offer
like my company offers we have a develop
use Center where I can go and I can
learn anything about many different
tools and and my husband's company has
has something as well he just
transitioned from teaching as well and
so he's constantly learning and growing
and yeah it's really cool yeah I love
that because you don't have to know it
all so for me that would be very stress
leading like oh okay
yeah
yeah and Google yeah Google if you don't
know something Google it it's totally
fine actually in my interview that is
what kind of gave me a sigh of relief is
that one of the managers said yeah if we
don't know something we Google it and I
was like yeah this is the place for me
it's awesome thank you Courtney for
sharing your experience I think that was
very useful and I think our listeners
will also think it's very useful you
know if you're a teacher right now or if
you're some whatever profession you are
that maybe is not related to you know
stem or not related to engineering or
not related to computer science or data
in any way just you know look at
Courtney as an awesome example of going
from a quote-unquote unrelated role I
agree I think teachers are data analysts
as well but going from that to where
she's at now where she not only got a
data role but got a senior data role
like a lead role like that is amazing
and so thank you so much Courtney for
coming on the data career podcast and
sharing your story thank you so much for
having me I hope you enjoyed episode and
if you did I'm gonna have an awesome
free master class that I know you're
going to love we're going to talk about
a lot of things this episode talked
about you can get it absolutely for free
at datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: Live Coding Python Project

Description: Come hang out for some live Python project coding!

Video Transcript:
all right what is up everyone
welcome welcome
I'm just gonna double check that we'll
make sure we're going live here
double check on the LinkedIn double
check on the YouTube
oh yeah we're oh wait no let's see
let's see let's see
Avery Smith
are we live oh we are live what's up
everyone welcome excited to uh have you
guys here
I'm gonna be doing some live uh
programming which will be kind of fun so
excited to have you guys here we're
going to be coding in Python what's up
uh emad everyone who's here say hi so I
can bring your little comment up on
stage
python so yeah I'm Gonna Be Live coding
some cool stuff in Python right now
um
let's see
kind of complex stuff but fun
all right what's up everyone welcome
welcome thanks for joining uh super cool
to have you guys here I don't know if I
can see how many people are watching can
you guys see how many people are
watching I can't either but hi Naveen hi
rui hi Nicholas hi nagar hi Marina hi
vaishali hi Joseph uh
glad you like the tips that's awesome uh
hi Nicholas
hi jayasara
hi Romana hi rui again perfect uh we got
um Sharon here sweet welcome Sharon hi
Isaac 55 people okay awesome thank you
emad hi Bruno okay so if you guys didn't
hear I'm going to be live coding some
python stuff which is gonna be pretty
fun I'm gonna be sharing my screen we're
going to it's it's gonna get a little
bit complicated today
um to be honest it's a little bit more
advanced stuff uh but it's gonna be a
lot of fun so I hope you guys enjoy so
what I'm going to be doing is I'm going
to be coding I have two projects I have
to code
should I start with the easy one or
should I start the hard one let's start
with the easier one how about that all
right so I'm going to start the easier
one
um and we're gonna get going here so
this one is going to be a python project
that uses machine learning in the
manufacturing and Engineering setting
um specifically for uh oil because I
used to work in oil and gas right so
we're going to look at a couple
different things we're going to build a
web app
um we're gonna build it probably in
streamlit I'm guessing we're gonna try
and streamlit and we're gonna go from
there so I'm gonna go ahead and share my
screen but before before I get started
just before I get into this
um if you guys haven't will you guys go
check out the data career podcast okay
it's my podcast here's here's it right
here boom data crew podcast this is on
Spotify
I'll go ahead and let me let me just
make a quick little Banner with it
data career podcast
right if you guys could just go there
and just hit follow or subscribe or give
it five stars if you guys are already
listening that would mean the world to
me I'm trying to grow the podcast more
so I'd love for you guys to just take a
look at that and if you you know get
value out of it great
um that would that would be awesome so
data career podcast go check it out
um here's how this is gonna work feel
free to post comments as many comments
as you would like down here in the chat
I'll pull them up as we go we're going
to be coding in Python all right let's
do it
so I'm gonna share my screen now boom
there's my screen
okay so the first thing I want to think
about is what am I going to build this
tool and I'm going to be building it in
Python
um and so we're going to go ahead and
open up python I like to use spider for
python it's it's if you download
Anaconda python through Anaconda
distribution it's going to come with
spider spider's probably my favorite IDE
um so uh all right Alexis data crew
podcast is what brought me here that's
awesome love to hear it fabulous content
be found there awesome I'm glad you
enjoy it that's so good to hear
um yeah let me see hold on hold on sorry
we're getting a lot of stuff let's see
now
okay spider should be open
okay there's spider right there
so now we can type in some python
oops there's my calendar you guys don't
need to see that
let's see I lost all you guys hold on
all right now we're back all right glad
you like Alexis all right so I'm gonna
start a new
um
a new file in Python
delete all these other ones that I've
been working on recently
do you prefer Ides like spiders or
notebooks or does it depend on the use
case depends on the use case but today
we're going to be using spider and not a
notebook because we're going to be
building a web app and web apps don't
work very well in uh online notebooks
and stuff like that so we're going to be
using this so
um let me also make sure okay uh I guess
I can hide that okay perfect then I'll
bring this over so we're going to be
doing a couple different things so let's
go ahead and pull this over here and
pull this over here and maybe one thing
we'll do is go to chat GPT
um I haven't like coded a whole lot
recently
um so
I'm gonna try to use some chat GPT to
code because I haven't I just haven't
used it so um I'm going to say I'm going
to create
a web app in streamlits
can you give me some basic code
for a good web app let's see what it
says
I just I haven't really done this much
people are saying I use Jupiter
Jupiter's fine I use vs code and pycharm
that's awesome those are fine it doesn't
really matter
I like Anaconda for a couple different
reasons but all right so here it is it's
going to give me some python code that's
in streamlits I don't really want this
stuff though that it's doing I don't
really care about that
um
all right this is not my favorite so
we're just gonna go to the streamlit
oh documentation
you guys have never used streamlined
before streamlit is awesome I never
remember exactly how to use it though so
we're gonna have a title we're gonna
have a header code blocks okay so I
guess the next step would actually be to
think through what I want this
application to do
so for this application I wanted to be
able to take this data set right here
and it's going to
visualize it maybe first off like
visualizing is one thing right and I
can't remember how much data this has
let me
let me create
a
folder here
and let's put this data inside the
folder
so I'm going to call this one the let's
call it the uh oil
oh the refinery one okay so I have this
folder called The Refinery I'm going to
get the data
data zip
pull that from my downloads
see
my downloads to this folder
unzip it
extract all
extract
okay let's see so okay that's right so
each one of these call these each one of
these files is a column
so one of the first things I'm going to
have to do is write code
okay there's a description
for everything
and what's documentation
just some more information
okay
okay we have this many
different columns so one of the things I
want to do is identify failures
classification
uh predict future values forecasting and
regression machine learning models
um Okay so
let's think so I need to read through
this one more time just make sure I
remember what it is
so we have like these different pressure
and flow sensors
class distribution
cooler condition close to total failure
reduced efficiency full efficiency
then there's valve conditions
no leakage
uh hydraulic accumulator
and stable flat conditions were stable
or static conditions might not have been
reached
okay
so one of the things I might want to do
is like just create some visualization
I'm thinking that would probably be an
important thing
to do
and I first need to get this data in a
useful format because right now it is
not so let's go back to uh chat GPT
let's see
where'd you go chat GPT there we are
let's see let's see
let's add I don't really love this code
so
um let's say can you write me some
python code that takes
all of the text files in a folder and
makes each text file a column let's say
a series a series
in a pandas data frame
once again I haven't done much coding
with job GPT so I'm experimenting here
I use a calculator honestly super
accurate for most complex mathematical
tasks very true Kobe very true
I love streamline I started with Dash
but streamlined's much easier and
growing a lot always new things yep I
agree really I agree okay so let's see I
can see
here
um
let's see so that's the path to the
folder we're gonna get a list of all the
text files in the folder all right while
that's writing
let's go ahead and go to
um
spider and we're gonna call this one
we're gonna save it as
documents
um data no no snow data science
Consulting Z
Refinery we'll call this we'll call this
getting the data file clean
right so that's one of the first things
we're gonna do I'm also going to pull
this profile okay what is profile
I don't really get what that is profile
um
so profile almost looks like
maybe we don't need profile
what about stable a stable is that se
oh wait what is SE
crap I need to look at these more
SC is the efficiency Factor okay cooling
efficiency cooling power vibration
temperature
volume oh okay so I think
um then there's okay then there's
uh cycle wise annotated and profile dot
txt okay so this is some of the profile
stuff so that's what's in profile
then cycle number okay
all right
so we're going to have the description
and the documentation that's going to go
above this data set then we're gonna
have one here called uh column
beta
and that is going to have everything
wait what is SC again
do we remember what SC is do anyone see
I don't see SE
I don't see anything with SC so let's
look at SC
oh wait did I decide wait no what's the
difference between Essie
oh is that the full data set
that might be the full data set let's
see
oh man
so that's c e
c p
s
now what the heck is SC
there's
so we know that there is let's see if I
can make this smaller
um we know that there is
PS1
eps1 what's eps1 all right right there
which is the motor power and then
there's FS which is the flows and then
there's ts's which are the temperatures
there's vs which is vibrations then
there's CE which is cooling efficiency
CP cooling power on SE the efficiency
factor I missed it all right perfect so
these are all the column datas except
for profile so I'm just going to take
all of these and move them into this so
that I know that they're separate okay
let me come back to chat GPT
see what it has what it gave me here
go to this folder
anything ends with txt then start a
blank data frame for all the files open
the file read the file
make a series and append it that seems
like the right code right there so I'm
going to paste that in and all I'll need
to do is give it a path to column data
right here which I like to do this by
copy paste
pasting that in all right and then once
we have the DF I want to go DF
2.2 underscore CSV and we'll call it uh
we'll call it the ing data.csv
all right I'm going to hit run all right
I hit some issues
it looks like it is in line 13.
um
what if I do a full quote around this
let's see
how are you guys doing let's see what
else is up SC is efficiency factor I
missed it will we get recording nope no
recording of This probably
um anything else how are you guys keep
commenting I'm gonna I'm gonna pull up
comments as you go all right
so let's see
um let's go and try to run that nope I
hit an error syntax folder path oh it
might be
it might be the fact
oh that this is
ah this is dumb we don't know that
should be fine
right let's see
folder path is that if I go to variable
Explorer
oh so we have an error here what is the
air
should this be a string should it not be
unescape codex can't one and two folder
path so if I do folder path is equal to
blah
it works fine all right and if I did it
is equal to
what if I just did users all the way to
Refinery refine there
yep we're fine there
now if I go all the way from Avery
up trying to figure out where this bug
is
let me know if you see it before me you
might all right we're good
now the question is if I do
a
users on the front of this were still
good
so I don't think it's that so we tried
the C
colon
Flash
now the slash crap I don't know where
slash is on my keyboard This is super
embarrassing
I have a new keyboard and I doesn't have
like drawings of everything and just
requires me to know where keys are I
can't remember where that key is so
let's do this
all right now does that work
no okay so it is this
all right so then we're gonna just we're
gonna do it more simple than that
because we're already inside of this
folder
right so where are we at
we're already inside of this folder
we're just gonna save it right here no
slash
you need to make more double slashes and
this uh
[Music]
all right all right
let's see let's see
all right so
yeah I agree they kind of
need to go the other way huh
so let's do this let's do let's go up
here
command F command R find all of these
slashes that go
this way
and replace with a double slash the
other way let's see if that works
run
nice
shout out to nagar
great help right there
all right
oh it looks like it's tab separated
though so it looks like we're gonna hit
some weird data if I had to guess
so if I go back here we now have
engineering data uh we can just look at
it
well let's see what it looks like let's
open it up
um this is probably dumb because it
could be huge and it could take a while
so we'll be smart too and we'll just
look at
the BF that we have
a
sizing looks a little bit weird on that
once again I'm experimenting oh yeah
yeah not good all right so hold on I am
messing this up because we're just
putting file content in there we don't
want to do that so file contents
um we can actually look let's stop doing
that
oh see I made a mistake that was dumb
you guys I'm a rusty little programmer
in Python and I trusted chat gbt too
much so what's happening here is I
wasn't being careful about what the file
contents have and so basically it's
putting the name and then all the values
in two different columns
um and then I printed out basically all
file contents and it's huge so we're
crashing everything and now I'm just
gonna crash it on purpose all right
we'll try that again all right spider
oh man that was some rusty stuff
how are you guys what's new tell me what
you're working on
you guys have any python projects going
on
all right
[Music]
delete delete delete delete delete
delete
this guy refinery
uh
[Music]
uh okay so now
if we were just to run this for example
and then let's just start let's just say
that file name
equals file list
in the zeroth index and basically we'll
read this
okay then we have
a variable in here that should be called
file contents
which is just like this crazy long
string right I don't know if I'll be
able to open it or not let's see okay I
can't open it
okay so it's just all the values here
that's good
um then
so then we're creating a series what if
we just say instead of doing this what
if we just say that
um
DF in the
file
name
is equal to
um
PD dot series of the file contents will
that work better
I don't know exactly if you can just
pass a string in there
you cannot so hold on so let's do type
of file contents
okay it's super string length uh file
contents so we somehow need to go from a
string
to basically like a an array of some
sorts right so once again I'm just going
to use chat GPT because I have never
used chatgpt with coding before so
um provide python code
to take what do we use here
uh um
we read uh a text file to take a text
file to pandas series
that
Iman says building a garbage image
classification robot right now that was
the other project I was going to work on
was some uh image classification which
I'm not good at
see this is
all right let's see so if I do
so if we do file contents
in the zero through the first for
example
that's just showing a four
okay interesting
but if I do pd.series
of the file contents
and I call that X for example that's
going to have a lot of weird stuff in it
right
uh oops I needed to do capital S on that
all right guys I am a rusty little
python programmer right here okay see
how it just has
okay so we did what if we did X into
zeroth for example so Y equals X and
zero I think that would work
all right right here but then that's a
string
so what if we just did file contents now
we can't do that either
all right I gotta think this through
we're gonna go back to actual
documentation instead of asking chat GPT
thanks chat GPT but we're good for now
um okay so let's think uh let's just do
let's just say text file two we probably
could just use pandas right
probably didn't even need to read it in
see
read CSV
oh interesting
so yeah we could just use pandas that
makes that's probably what I would have
done
um and let me see if I just want to see
if they have the example no they don't
even have the example
that we are working with so we're just
gonna do this
uh panda
oh wait but this is actually this is
actually to Panda's data frame column
another really matters we could get away
with it I'm just trying to see if
there's a better way of doing this
that would read
let's make it a series instead and let's
see what that suggests
all right
whatever
let's see
so if I were doing this maybe try this
uh read tab separated yeah
I think you're probably right but then
I'm reading the those are becoming data
frames so that's that's the problem I
don't really want to become data frames
but then I guess we'll just combine the
data frames
um
yeah so we'll just do this let's just
get rid of this
for this we're just gonna do DF temp
equals PD dot read underscore CSV the
file name which is file name right here
the separator is equal to a tab
oh my gosh where's my backslash on my
keyboard
hold on you guys
yeah we can merge them we'll just do
that
let me see if my keyboard layout has
where my backslash is
[Music]
oh
this is what my keyboard looks like
[Music]
okay so then I press ah okay okay okay
okay so if I go back here
and I press this button and then that
button all right there we go
okay then I have to stop pressing that
button and then press t okay so let's
first just check off and make sure that
that works right
uh okay why is there no such thing as
okay but now we need to add
where the file name is at
which from here
I think it's
there
right
so it might look like this
so if I were to do this
that look like
I need those uh
well let's try that
might need some
oh yeah I need a slash
at the end
um let's see where we're at I don't
remember so we are in this we need to go
into Data two
and then column data okay
column two
so yeah I think
that's how you do it I always struggle
with these things let's see if I can
work maybe no slash at the beginning
oh my gosh
slash CX
data two
all right hold on
read CSV
in another folder
dot dot ah all right
oops forgot that
so put that there go to the dot dot
see if that works
oh still messed it up how'd I mess that
up still
what folder are they in so you have
folder folder two scripts and then the
data folder oh that's going up
we don't want to go up right because
they're in the scripts folder so you
have to go out into folder two and then
down into Data folder
and we would just need to go down into
Data folder
oh my gosh you guys I'm so sorry
yep you're right dot dot is above I knew
that
let's see
column data
hmm
would have thought that it was this then
but it is not
right well what else can we do here
man Rusty
buttons here
or data folder okay so no slash at the
beginning
yeah we could do that
we could do that
what if we just grab
this whole thing right here
ugly
it works
ugly but it works all right so then we
have DFT
which okay and here's another thing we
need to do is we need to say that
there's no
uh columns
or there's one column
because it's just one we're not actually
reading in a whole thing so
um let's think where would I
so pandas read
CSV only as one column
let's see oh
let's see let's see
so we can probably
just say header equals none let's try
that
I don't I've never loaded all of this
into ones this is new for me
I hope that didn't work we still have
all of the
oh that just rolled it down yeah we
don't want that
so let's see
who would have thought that reading in a
text file would be so difficult
when it's just one column
Yep this is what we want to do
okay so this is reshaping it
man I don't want to do any of that stuff
but
let's think so we have this text file
this text file is right here we're using
the read CSV to pull it in
what if we just did
names equals
uh and then what if we just did the name
file name here
we just double check to make sure the
names is the right thing
to put in there
yeah let's try that
I don't know if that will work or not
names are not allowed all right there
you go
um
so read CSV kind of sucks because
there's no way for us to read that as
just one thing
what if we just check this to arrays
first
so what if we just go
um python
text file to array
we just try to use numpy First
um
text file
so read lines
split okay
so for example if we just did this with
the
just name the file that we have so let's
call it
uh absolute path
that equal to this really long thing
right here
copy that put it there
call this the absolute path
right now instead of well let's actually
run this just so it knows where the
absolute path is then we're going to try
to do this
where text file is going to be
oh wait wait it's
read
let's try this
so we're going to read the text file
which is the absolute path
okay there's the text file
then we are going to split it now the
split is probably going to be done by a
tab I don't know if we can do that I'm
assuming we can
so we're going to do line split it by
what would be
a t
lines
that didn't work so let's just make sure
I got the syntax right for that
uh
um
python split string by tab
I tab I thought I got that right
did I get the backslash right so it's
nope I didn't wrong way
uh so let's go over here delete press
that button press that button press that
button
now lines did not work at all though
okay so what am I doing wrong here so
we're splitting
um
this is the heart this is the easy part
of the project
oh man
isn't that what I just did
what if I just copy that and
in case I somehow
nope that is not working huh
python split string by tab into array
I feel like this should not be that hard
um so there's the string
we are splitting the string oh maybe I
need a r in front of that let's see
if you need an r in front of this
because it's like raw
oh did not work
uh what if we just did
hold on what if we just spread this in
as a string or yeah let's let's do that
let's do that let's do that
um so instead of this text line thing
let's just read in
python read and text file as string
let's just do that
let's just do that
all right
so it's back to what we started with
yeah exactly and then we're going to
yeah hold on
we're gonna take this put it over here
we're gonna read it in and then we're
gonna
I'm sorry I'm confusing myself there we
go this is what I was trying to find
then we're gonna split it by the tab all
right so we're going to read the string
in
um
let's just do this
for example
so if I read this in
file content equals file read
eight file name
file
folder path
file name okay file contents now has
this really big string now I'm going to
take that really big string and I am
going to split it by a tab let's see
yeah right there
something like that let's see if that
works
um so now this would be
a zombie called re right oh it is
because we are using red guys for this
all right this is probably not the best
way to do this I'm going to say that now
uh
we're gonna pull in
file
contents
all right perfect
oh but then there's new lines
oh my gosh
all right so let's call this let's do
this and then Dot
split again
on r
uh
backslash
t
plus where is my Plus
there
and then
what if we just do this actually we'll
call this x this is so inefficient
say that y
is equal to
uh re.split basically this exact same
thing
instead oh wait but now this now hold on
now X is a freaking array though huh
well this was supposed to be the easy
part so
um not going so good for me so far
and all I need to do is freaking get
this
These Guys these text files
into
my
data frame
let's start over
python
and those data frame
from a bunch of text files
let's try this
so this uses the txt
so annoying though
okay here we are
concatenate the list of data frames hold
on let's actually see what this is
multiple text concatenate
yep
but the only issue with this
right is
we can't even get
so um that could work but the problem
with this is we can't even get one of
these
one of these guys in
so PD dot read
says x equal to PD dot read underscore
CSV of absolute path
uh maybe we can see if there's something
about
uh
ignore new lines pandas read CSV
thank you
um
skip blank lines
littered with new lines that don't act
as the limiter of the data
all right every entry is limited by that
split by new lines
okay
okay
okay
so if we just use like a different
symbol as the line so let's actually put
that in here
do this
and let's close it
okay
now that didn't work all the way because
we need to also have
a delimiter
on
right does it talk about this right here
the limiter okay yes that's going to be
that
yes I'm so sorry this has taken so long
all right let's go to the left comma
space paste
well I hit enter and it's taking a
little bit
that could be really good
it's taking kind of too long
let's see if that's gonna help
let's see why is that taking so freaking
long
should it be that long
[Music]
that makes me think it's gonna like air
out
hmm
you know what
this went very poorly
this should not be that hard
but they're all like this right
um what if we just do a more read
text file to python array let's just see
what that does
still not done that's going to be way
too slow
I also don't even really know if the
data
is
columnar or not let's see
where can I find some of that
information
description
like does it go left and right or up and
down
uh I'm gonna guess it goes to the right
yeah okay
all right so what if we just read it in
as a bunch of lists okay we could
probably do that so
what if we just read this and I'm
deleting all of this for right now
no I'm not let's keep some of it
so what if we just read it in one line
at a time
into a list
okay
all right so let's just see what this
does
some of this
file name will open file name will say
open
and we'll pass the absolute path in here
and we'll say that the lines is equal to
all that stuff as a new line
right now we have a bunch of
lines right
so we have a bunch of lines inside of
this okay
and then what if we said
data is equal to
uh
or
I in
lines
let's think
so 4i in lines
if I just did this for example that's
just going to be the exact same thing
right so 4i in lines go one at a time
data yeah it's just the same as lines
um
so we almost need like a double Loop
here oh kadisha I'm just struggling with
dumb python coding stuff
I'm doing it like a really inefficient
way but it is what it is so
we're gonna go through each file and
we're gonna go through each line all
right so here's the line right here so
for that okay then
here's another for Loop right here four
uh I in lines we'll say that uh
line temp
is equal to lines
in the eye this is going to be so
inefficient I think it's gonna be too
slow line temp in lines in the eye so
that would basically be lines
so let's say line temp is equal to lines
for instance in the zeroth
right here
now we have line temp which is just a
really big string now what if we strip
that's or split that
split split
rats
well I don't know it split lines is that
could be useful we'll just split it
by that tab thing that we want to do
which is
T no
backslash t
something like that
then if we did that that will give you
an array of all these lines right
okay I is not available sure it's zero
in this case for fun
line temp okay now
line temp
is just
okay yep so it's just
and what if we
um so that is just going to be a list of
numbers now what if we get those list of
numbers to
well it's a list of strings so list of
strings to list of floats
we can just add something at the end
see or we go through each one separately
uh let's see so let's do a python text
split to
uh floats let's see if that has anything
better
okay it just says list comprehension as
well
so actually we're going to just use the
list comprehension this is going to be
so slow but luckily we'll need to run
this once so it should be fine
so if we actually do
what this
floats X4 lines
I
instead of s here
split and then make sure we add the
right split
that would give me
a list
of
all the numbers in that particular
guy
okay so now we have the line temporary
and basically before
all of this
you need to set up a
uh we'll say a column
set it equal to
this
and then once we go through all of the
lines well actually no each one we're
going to do column dot append of the
line temp
Okay so
I said I equal to zero
and then we already have a bunch of
lines all right let's see lines
did we not all right here there's a
bunch of lines right then we're gonna go
through one line at a time
and build out the whole column
so copy paste
uh okay so let's see lines
Rebecca's lines
oh shoot
so hold on I'm wrong again because I
forgot what lines is
so if I do type of lines
okay lines is a list yeah
okay and
lines has 2205 so if I do lines and the
zero
look like that
okay
so four
so uh okay so then we basically are
saying that I is equal to zero I know I
equals zero oh for I in um
range of zero through the length
forgot what I was doing here
we go
now that should work let's try one more
time
okay so let's take a look at column now
okay and then we just need a
wait is column the exact same thing as
lines
hold on column's the exact same thing as
lines
so we're not actually going to use a pen
here I think we're going to
um let's think let's think let's think
so we get line temporary out
which is just a list
um oh I think you could just do
line
temp plus line temp
let's say that is equal to
YY equals
okay so that's 120. yeah okay that's
actually we want to do we'll just say
that column
is equal to column plus line temp aha
now that should work finally
oh my God whatever just to do that
all right uh okay column is now really
big which it really should be so if I do
length of column that should be equal to
I think uh the length of data times 60
it looked like to me
yes we did it oh my gosh we did it
oh my gosh that was way too much work
okay
so then we have this thing called column
which is basically just
big old list and then we can say that
data frame
we can say that data frame
in the
uh file name
equal to
say equal to the column and then we're
resetting the column all right so then
if I hit run with all of this this
should take a while
oh my gosh this is crazy
this is what code truecalling looks like
those Day in the Life videos on YouTube
are mirages and lies yep exactly this
freaking sucked this is just to even get
started I haven't even done the coding
this is just to get my data and it took
me like a really long time to be honest
um I don't know how long we've been
streaming for but it was a way long time
so yeah that sucked and I'm glad you
guys got to see me struggle
um that was not fun for me to struggle
but that is real life okay so that
should be done here that should be
finished okay now that that's done we're
gonna create a streamlit dashboard
um hello on the stream with dashboard to
look
I'm not entirely sure what exactly I
wanted to do
um I I know I want to view the data
and like let's just let's just view the
data
and also be able to choose what we want
to see
and
um
do some machine learning
so
we could put like a date filter at the
top theoretically
what else should we add what did I say I
was going to do
identify failures so it'd be really cool
actually if I could do
um
yeah I don't know yet
predict values
so what if we just did some like basic
prediction stuff
um we could do some
fault detection
so we'll divide I guess half this data
into training and testing
and try to be able to predict when a
fault occurs
so
that'll be kind of interesting
oh boy I hit a freaking air
um all right I guess what I should have
done actually is probably hit print
and then said the file name
then I'll say
is done so I could have known where
that's timing out
because I hit an air somewhere it looks
like
this looks too big
so now I'm worried that they're not all
the same
frequency
oh and they're freaking not oh my
freaking gosh
um
okay well yep that's the problem these
are a hundred
these are ten
and these are one
okay
so we're gonna put in some logic gosh
this is stupid
um logic to fix sampling differences
okay so if it is
if it is where is that
sampling rate I just saw
this is so dumb oh my gosh
how could I have known that
I guess I could have noticed this so if
it is a p
or an e
uh or if it is a f
we're gonna act differently okay so what
we're going to do is we're just going to
say
um
let's just take first letter which is
equal to
the file name in the zeroth
uh if
uh first
letter is equal to
a p
where's pipe or pipe is on this
um we'll just have to copy it from the
internet I guess
or in Python
right which is hype
see
can I just write or right here I don't
think so
or all right maybe
first letter in python or equals p
or I always use the pipe but maybe we
can use or
or the first letter is equal to an E
and column is actually not column it's
column
from the zeroth ten zero and that should
make it
um the same size so we'll just double
check
um if
if l or l if sorry gosh I'm Rusty if
first letter is not e and instead it is
a p
or what is that an F if it is an F
then the same thing
wait that's a hundred times more so this
is actually going to be a hundred for
that one
and only
100 for this one
um
10 for that one sorry
uh elf
else column is just equal to column
then at the end we're going to print
the length of column and hope that
they're all the same size
all right
um I have to do that
all right so those are all the same size
okay we'll wait for the rest of that to
go on in the meantime I still have to
figure out what the heck I'm doing
with this project so
I'm probably going to visualize some of
it
I'm probably going to detect failures
let's see so usually you'd like split up
your data set into like multiple
different things
man I don't know exactly what I'm gonna
do where I figure that out
what is taking so long
that's not good we'll have to check
okay
in the meantime you know I'm gonna start
the other project because this uh this
first project is not good luck for me
so this other project
that I'm doing kind of at the same time
is going to be called we'll call it the
image
here
uh let's get the data download
oh
um extract all
extract
oh it's big you guys it's big
this one
let's see
let's see let's see
um
[Music]
let's see
okay
gotcha
let's see I'm doing some research over
here
okay so this
crap I can't remember if we're training
or not probably not
okay so I gotta figure that out
uh we hitting there
CP text is done and it was only 100.
oh my gosh
well first off this isn't gonna work
that's supposed to be a 10.
but then CP so wait let's figure out
what happened with CP so CP
has
column right here
that's only a hundred
yeah that is the problem right there
says what is CP and why
okay so hold on
actually
um
so that one's right but maybe we should
call this something else maybe we'll
call it column one one one
print one
column one okay let's restart everything
okay that's see those numbers shouldn't
be so big
right because
we know that
we know that for instance lines has 2205
and each line has
each line
lines is 2205 or I asked how many lines
and then there's line temp which is what
line temp is six thousand
so we know total there's that huge
number
right here
oh but we're dividing by
a hundred on this
that would be the number huh
okay but then on
uh which I guess I is equal to
see
finally okay file name
does not have Okay file underscore name
okay so it is es eps1 right now
and what do we get when we do this let's
just double check
that load
all right and in the meantime I'm going
to start creating a streamlit dashboard
boy I'm tired
um
this Streamlight dashboard is basically
going to
have a title
whereas call it the
um
past widget
this is called
quality analysis
all right so let's bring that up
then I know what else I'm gonna have
there is oops double quotes
grab a title
we are going to have
a
example of good cast and Bad cast
we are going to have an upload image
it's going to say
is it right or wrong
all right that's pretty much what we'll
do
why is this taking forever
I don't freaking get it you guys
what the heck I don't get what that
shouldn't be that long
so
lines
okay that was dumb
lines is huge
yep I just froze it
oh man that was dumb
note self don't do dumb stuff
don't do dumb stuff
all right well I biffed on that one
do you think there's any recovery I
don't think so we'll just force quit it
oh dumb
dumb
hopefully my work was all saved I didn't
really check
the Streamlight one is probably not but
that's okay
so
um
but we would want the
image nope the refinery
and it looks like it was safe so
if I just run this again
I don't even really want to run it to be
honest I just want to get to
point where it's struggling
so I is equal to 2 because that's the
third
so uh file name is actually just equal
to file list in the I
then we have the absolute path and let's
just get the column let's just start
here let's see let's see if that how
that goes
so we know that lines is 2205. right
okay and if we just took
if we just took
uh for instance okay well we'll say I is
equal to zero we just took the first
line here
get that temporary line how long is that
okay so I'd be
what is the file name
I just got here saw the crash and this
was already the best coding live stream
I've ever seen hey that's awesome good
I'm so glad yep we are struggling
through this
this is sucking big time and I have to
go in like 15 minutes
but I'm glad you guys are here and
you get to see a little bit of yeah so
real exactly
that's what's going on we are doing real
stuff so what is six thousand
Times by 2205
okay that huge number
okay so we're good
then it should be going through this
um but it's not wait what is CE
is that what we're on
what the freak
this makes no sense the sampling
is
that huge number
all right you know what we're gonna we
made a mistake
we made a mistake and that is we should
just print out
um
oh fetch stop doing that
um we should just print it out
how long everything is so length of
column let's just print that out and
we'll print out the
uh print the um
name two
who's at the beginning let's just we'll
just print it out the beginning so we'll
say print
file name so that way we always know
which one's going
Okay so
see text okay we're gonna say
Plus
has started
and then we'll say
is done so then that one CP is started
is done and now it's on E and what is e
maybe that's our making a mistake
so we did two C's and now we're moving
to e and e is a hundred
and Y
you know what this
why is that taking so long
maybe we should be printing out the
length
you know I'm gonna restart this stop
that we're going to print out the length
of lines
prints we'll say number of lines boom
boom Plus
the string of
uh length of lines
see if that gives me any more clarity
because I don't know why one of those is
going so fast
so number of lines 2205 2205 C has the
same number of lines
all right but then we must have a
different number of line temps I guess
so let's say that print
say we'll do like a little dash dash oh
wait dash dash dash dash and we'll say
um
we'll just say Plus
length of line
um now do I have to put that string I
don't want to let's see if I need to yep
I do
that's what I thought
okay
boom
ah okay that
I think showed me
hold on we don't want to put it there we
want to put it
maybe at the end
of the for Loop but then that's the same
spot so
yeah because it's going through 2000
times
so what if I
what if we just print this
where am I printing that
hello
uh control y
'all oh dang it that's not working
what did I just run I ran a print
somewhere right I think I ran out of
here so that's a number of lines so
print we use a duh
to signify and then we're just going to
take
lines
so we're just going to take uh dummy
we're gonna call It Dummy we're getting
to bad variable names lines in the
zeroth
and we're going to split it by that so
that way we just get a feel for what one
of those lines this is so dumb this
should be taking me zero time
oh wow plus string of the length of
gummy
okay
that's see this is where we're getting
stuck it's just taking a while huh so
the number of lines is still the same
oh so that means
the number of lines is still the same
you know what
the logic should be up here I figured it
out
this this will make it faster so
all we need to do is down here
is
basically move this stuff down here
so if
um
we're going to delete these things for a
little bit
and oh man now I'm getting a headache
hold on uh this is reading
this is
comment comment your code because that
way when you're tired you'll remember
what it is
for Loop for all lines
Loop through all the texts
um
okay but yeah then based off of this
decision right because if I have a YY is
equal to
um
like that
right I could do that and I could say
um
uh what can I say
we'll say X
for
X
in YY and then right here this is where
we're going to put the 2 in for example
in this case
uh did that Skip by twos hold on
that's right
either by myself
python
list Skip by
two
I'll not keep to skip two but
that's what I was trying to do
skipping a value
I thought I'm doing this right but now
I'm like at the point where I'm like
so tired that I don't even know python
list
Skip by ten oh yeah right and element
I'm pretty sure that's how you do it
uh
uh let's see
how to skip every any nth index of a
python array that's what I'm trying to
do
let's see nope that's not right either
crap
I thought that's what this is
why why oh wait wait hold on why why
oh gosh
maybe I do not know what I'm doing here
is that all of them
oh maybe it's the maybe it's the ending
number hold on
let's try
putting in
there we go two four because that'd be
two four twelve three oh my gosh it took
me a long time to remember that
so then if I wanted to be every tenth or
a hundredth or something like that right
so what we're going to do is say if the
first letter is P or e
if the first letter is P or e
P or e
no no yeah P or E is that right
P or E yep okay so if it's p or E we're
gonna do every tenth so that means that
we'll still have the line
but
now we'll skip every 10 values
so and so it'd be lines this
but then it would look like this
so line temp
all right this is so confusing
if it's that
I could create a little function here
huh
I create a function
I'm too tired all right so if
for I for all this okay so for all of
this
holy crap
I feel like I've been doing this too
long that I don't even see it anymore
I'm gonna turn off these lights because
they kind of hurt my eyes
let's see
print
so first figure out the first letter
we don't need this
and we need
to go through all the lines yep
then the line temp
this is where we're going to be putting
that okay there delete
uh move this over so tab
for all the lines figure out if it's a p
or E if it is we're going to be
doing this exact same thing
but by 10.
100.
and if not we're going to be doing
the exact same thing
by 10 and if not we're going to be doing
the exact same thing
I won
it's just regular right let's just
double check we don't want to make that
be the stupid error
one yep we're good okay so that way
we're creating column
okay and the dummy okay so now that
should work I'm sure there's an error
okay
could not convert
all right so let's work on our prints
here so first we go through all this
then we say
find the file
then
it's the lines for that file
and then we'll say four
all of the lines
inside for all lines inside file and at
this point we are printing what are we
printing okay we don't want that I don't
think let's get rid of that
restart one more time
let's see where that gets us
okay so we number of lines 2205 number
lines 2205 okay this is where we're
getting
and then we could not convert a string
to a float
and that is an issue
so every 100
uh do we need so for example we're
floating the X
which which is just
yeah this is hard that is a hard how do
we fix that how do we check for that
double bullet point
um
we can't
um
sharing has two periods two can't
hurt to float
and we should I mean I don't even know
if that is really
I mean I guess we assume that that is
really the case right
because that is in the line temp
and so I mean somewhere in lines there's
an issue so if I go look at lines
are in Line's temp there's an issue
somewhere in here
I don't even see it
204.7
let's Oh wait we're going lines
temp which is lines in the ice
okay so this failed earlier so lines in
the ice right now
so if I just say uh Y is equal to lines
in the ice and how many
that's fine
why
all right we have a lot of values in
here
uh uh okay how the heck am I supposed to
figure out where
204 is
you know what this is so funny I'm like
so mad at this
what
it's right there
right that's what it's going to be
what is the value
204
hold on let's just I search this thing
or no
search it
a text editor
204
I can't even find 204.
I'm like so tempted to just be done with
this data set
because it's just messy as can be
all right well
[Music]
I mean I don't know how the heck I'm
supposed to convert that
it makes me think that
there's some other value hidden inside
of here
I don't know why I would look like this
lines in the eye
all right what if I just did no that's
not gonna work
right wait what is lines
lines
okay lines is a list but lines in the
eye is a string we're going through the
string oh I see the issue here
oh shoot
oh boy
yep I see the issue
because
if you were to
do this
yeah this makes no sense all those
numbers are Jack
because I thought that was this freaking
so hold on
so
here's lines in the Y it's just a string
so instead of this being right here
it needs to be on the other side
figured it out but gosh
what's the objective that is a good
question
to not die at the moment
the objective is to make a beautiful
lab application but we're just trying to
get the data
right
right restart
restart restart
it's working
it's working
it worked
oh my gosh did it work
Ed it worked
okay but now here's the question though
here's the question I'm going to be
using this with the other data set that
came with it
the profile data right here what is the
profile data
how what what's the frequency of the
profile data
because if those those don't match up
we're screwed
holy crap I didn't even think about that
it doesn't even say all right so let's
just do a simple
uh
you have two equals pandas dot read
underscore CSV
and I guess I'll just do the exact
for that data exactly is so I don't have
to
mess with it like I have in the past so
caught I think if you hit shift oh
click on it shift
copy this path
paste
all right that's probably not going to
work because
I need backslashes and stuff
yep I do so we need to put a
slash there
slash there slash there slash there
slash there slash there slash there
slash there
oh Waits whatever whatever oh hold on
Save hold on don't don't do anything
crazy don't delete on me
don't delete on me
all right there's no pandas is that's a
good air to get that just means I named
it PD and I forgot
oh come on
you have to ndf
okay hold on
that looked really bad
uh that looked really no good
um
let's see python read text value as CSV
line delimiter
uh
line
Elementary
oh man
pandas read CSV line delimiter
I'm Googling over here
right here
um
I think it would be equal to
uh backslash n
ope
[Music]
um maybe it needs an R
in front of it
oh
oh boy you guys
oh the backslash is the wrong way the
backslash is the wrong way
all right hold on
F2
what are these like
oh those are just
okay
okay hold on that doesn't hurt but
uh delimiter
limiter equals to the um
hold on
equal to
t
that flashes the wrong way again
somehow
some way
all right this will be the moment of
truth let's see
perfect
uh
oh man
how do I get that to work just barely
um back back
let's throw an R out on the front of
this if that doesn't work I'm gonna head
oh it did work
all right and now I have everything
uh header equals none is another thing
we want to add
laughs
you know the problem is though
let's see
df2
205
so this is hilarious so that 2205
is the same
number as these things
so 2205 how much is 2205.
like a day
so let's say that was
that in minutes
how much is one Hertz
does anyone know in the chat how much is
a Hertz
how long is one HZ
in seconds
yeah that's not one Hertz is a replica
of one second
yeah I know it's not a unit of time
exactly but
because this says
so I hope this is how many cycles per
second
so number of attributes number of
instances how long is an instance
the system cyclically repeats constant
load Cycles duration 60 Seconds
load Cycles
so let's just say that's minutes
how many instances
man
we'll just say it's minutes
2205
and it's two hours
every six hours
I don't know
I don't know
all right well
that's where we got today hope you guys
enjoyed that was uh
tough coding session I have had a time
to go chill

Title: How to Solve any Data Analytics Error You Face...

Description: Let's face it; data analytics can sometimes be a real pain in the spreadsheet.

You spend hours analysing data, writing code, and crafting reports, only to have one mystery bug stop your work from progressing.

I'll show you my 10-step guide for solving ANY data problem.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Timestamps:
2:19 - Step 1: Copy your error message
3:29 - Step 2: Use Google, Stack Overflow & ChatGPT
5:28 - Step 3: Double check everything!
6:58 - Step 4: Rubber Duck it!
7:58 - Step 5: Read manual & documentation
9:45 - Step 6: Walk away, just walk.
14:19 - Step 7: Turn it off!
12:52 - Step 8: Screenshot & screenrecord it
15:18 -Step 10: Say thank you!



Video Transcript:
on this episode of the data career
podcast I'm going to walk you through 10
steps that you can follow when you get
stuck doing a data analytics problem if
you follow these 10 steps you'll be able
to get through more problems push
through more barriers but also you'll be
able to get more help from others when
you encounter those problems so there
are 10 awesome tips this is the data
career podcast episode 51. welcome to
the data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job here's your host
Avery Smith what to do when you get
stuck doing data analytics let's face it
sometimes data analytics can really suck
it can be really hard and very difficult
and very challenging and then you hit a
bug you hit an error you hit something
that is stopping your progression from
actually moving forward and it's the
most frustrating experience on planet
Earth like seriously it can be so
infuriating when you're on your way you
have all this momentum and then all of a
sudden your code stops work working so
what do you do in those situations how
do you solve the problem how do you fix
it in Tableau in Python and SQL in this
quick episode I'm going to give you a
10-step template that will give you
actionable steps that you can take in
these situations to get out of that rat
and to solve that bug but before we get
into that 10-step template you can
follow I want to talk about what not to
do the number one rule of the things
that you shouldn't do in the situation
is just say I'm stuck with SQL someone
please help no no no no no no no we need
to be very specific in these situations
the more details we can give the better
we want to over share and not undershare
this means comments like I don't know
what's going wrong but it's not working
for me I didn't get that answer why is
mine different and I don't know why I
couldn't get this to work but I just
couldn't figure it out these are totally
unacceptable and you should eliminate
them from your vocabulary you need to
tell more details you need to add more
details you always want to over share
and not undershare again we can't just
say I'm stuck with SQL or I don't know
why but it's nothing codes not working
we need to over share on the details and
in terms of what to overshare and how to
solve this problem now I'm going to go
ahead and dive into the 10 point
template that you can follow to debug
any sort of data analytics problem you
ready let's hop into it number one is
you need to copy and paste the error
message I can't emphasize this enough
and it sounds simple but so many people
don't do it if you hit in there it's
likely there's some sort of error
message that pops up whether you're
using SQL you're using python using
Tableau using Excel there's going to be
some sort of error code that's going to
pop up sometimes it's just like a bunch
of random letters and it's Error
54a72432 that's okay copying that for
right now sometimes it's more
descriptive you know air 14 because of
this and this you know because if you
did this this is not working sometimes
they're very descriptive sometimes
they're less descriptive but either way
you need to copy that error code that is
the first thing you need to do because
that error code is the key to solving
your problem we don't know what the
problem is we can't solve it so hence we
really need to know what that error is
so copy and paste the error message as
soon as you get it and where are we
pasting it well we can paste it a lot of
different places we're going to talk
about that in the later steps we can ask
a friend we can put it in Google but
having that error message accessible and
ready is going to be very key for
solving the problem number two once you
have that error message copied and
pasted is to paste it into Google Google
is your best friend and you should have
no shame in Googling these types of
errors it's very acceptable everyone's
doing it so you don't have to be worried
about like oh I'm not good enough no
it's perfectly fine you're perfectly
fine put it into Google Google is going
to obviously it's a huge search engine
that's going to index all the different
times that phrase was said so I actually
will copy and paste the exact error
message into Google and hit enter a lot
lot of the times I'll need to like copy
or select some parts that are more
specific to me like for instance if I
named a variable or if it has some text
that I put in obviously not everyone's
going to have the exact same situation
but the majority of the error message
should be the same as you put it into
Google the majority of errors are not
new they've been seen once or twice or
50 times before and so putting it in
Google can be really helpful a lot of
the times you'll find an awesome website
called stack Overflow and stack Overflow
is a great place where people talk about
their errors that they're having the
bugs that they're having and coders
developers data people they will give
you answers and so a lot of the times
you'll be able to find the answer to
your problem by pasting it into a Google
search clicking on the stack Overflow
link and then going to the answers there
and a lot of the times that is where
your answer will be other times it will
not be so easy so after you've tried
Google go ahead and try chat GPT chat
GPT obviously uses AI to solve awesome
coding problems and honestly it might
even be better than Google at this Point
who knows depending on when you're
watching this video chat gbt obviously
has a lot of Promise so if you actually
just copy and paste the air into chatgpt
and describe what's happening you can
have a lot of success even if you just
say what you're trying to do and what
tools you're using and what type of area
you're getting you can get good results
from chat GPT as well so using both
Google stack Overflow and chat GPT is
honestly likes a superpower to solving
your data bug problems number three is
to double check the little stuff it is
so infuriating you guys in fact I always
tell my wife about these bugs that I
have in my code and how it was one comma
or one parenthesis or one quotation mark
and she says man I could never be a
programmer that is way too much detailed
and it is it is hard it's hard to be
that detail-oriented but just go ahead
go through your code check your
parentheses do they all close check your
quotations do they all close a lot of
the times when you're using IDs if you
have parentheses they have auto complete
on the parentheses or you can click the
parentheses and it will highlight both
the ending and the starting parentheses
so that's a good way to make sure that
your parentheses start and end when you
think the same goes for quotes or
sometimes they even use colors to show
what's inside quotes and what's outside
quotes so just make sure if you start
with a single quote you're using a
single quote at the end if you start
with a double quote you're using a
double quote at the end double check
commas they somehow get everywhere and
nowhere at the same time double check
your slashes I recently was doing some
web development and I had a bug that I
couldn't fix for about two and a half
hours and it turns out I was using a
double slash instead of a single slash
that's like a really small one but
obviously it caused a lot of pain in my
brain and so it might cause some pain in
your brain as well also double check
your indentations a lot of programming
you need to have tabs and spaces in the
right places some do some don't for
example you know SQL doesn't really
matter but python it does matter
sometimes so double check you have your
spaces and your tabs exactly where
they're supposed to be number four is to
to rubber duck it and that sound kind of
weird to talk about rubber ducks at this
point in such like a tech video but
basically there's something called the
rubber duck Theory and that is in 1999
there were these programmers who you
know they stuck on bugs and they had a
rubber duck on their desk that they
would talk to they'd basically explain
the code explain the technical whatever
was happening line by line one step at a
time to a duck obviously the duck did
not understand but that's actually
really good because they were explaining
everything the basics fundamentals to
the duck one line at a time and when you
do that it really makes you think and
double check is your code doing what
your brain thinks it's telling it to do
and so if you do that you do it line by
line a lot of the times that rubber duck
is somehow gonna tell you where that air
is and of course it's not really going
to speak it's probably your brain
telling you where that air is but
talking to the rubber duck allows your
brain to discover that bug that's been
hidden for hours and all of a sudden
within 10 minutes the rubber duck finds
it who knows it's amazing number five
and you could argue that this should
have gone earlier but that is to check
the help guide and the documentation if
you're using a no code tool like Tableau
or Excel there's going to be a lot of
help guides from those organizations and
in those help guides you might be able
to find the solution to your error if
you check there other times you're going
to be coding in SQL or something like
that there's going to be a lot of docs
or documentation those are going to be
basically the manual the instructions
for the tool that you're using and it's
going to tell you exactly how to use
that tool and usually give you some
pretty good examples and so oftentimes
you'll be able to look at the examples
and compare to your code and maybe see
how you're off in one place or another
and that will help you solve the problem
this isn't always guaranteed to work I'm
a little lazy so I much rather Google it
or ask chatgpt before I go to the
documentation but if those have failed
me I'm going to check one last time in
documentation check the help guide one
more time and see if that's going to
help me also if you go to that tools
website you're likely to find that they
have some sort of a forum for users
where you can you know put questions
this might be a good place to ask the
question because we're almost getting to
the point where we don't know how to
solve it we've tried ourselves we have a
couple more tips but just tuck this in
the back of your mind that there's
probably some user group or user form
for your specific tool that you can use
for instance one of my favorite python
libraries is plotly they have this whole
like online Forum to basically solve any
sort of plotly issues that you might
have it's one of the better communities
in the space but of course there's stuff
for power bi I use their Forum a lot
when I'm doing dashboards and
visualizations in power bi Tableau has
their own so there's lots of good
reasons and a lot of the times you're
going to find these forums when you've
Googled the air because a lot of the
times that's where the air is actually
being solved is in these forums step
number six is to just walk away do
something else this one is a little
controversial because you're so mad you
want to fix it you were in the flow
you're ready to get going but when you
hit or bug one of the best things that
you can do is just walk away it's
amazing when we're not at our desk when
we're not our computers our brains
somehow magically solve that technical
programming problem just magic out of
nowhere and it's absolutely amazing so
go grab a nap go grab lunch go do
something else at your desk go talk to a
co-worker go for a walk whatever you
want to do go do it and come back to it
it's really easy when you're facing a
bug to just be stuck at your desk
hitting your head on the keyboard over
and over and over again because you want
to get it done you're ready to move on
and you're so frustrating because you
just don't know what's going wrong but
that's a recipe for wasting hours don't
waste hours move on come back to it
number seven is to turn it off I don't
know if you guys have seen this show
called The it Club I don't even know
much about it I think it's British I
watched there's like four seasons on
Netflix I think you can look it up it's
kind of funny kind of humorous but it's
almost like the office where it's kind
of a documentary of what's happening at
the office except for this office is the
I.T Department of some some sort of a
company and there's like three main
characters but I.T support for them I
forgot his name but he he's in charge of
the calls so basically someone in the
company will be having some sort of an
I.T issue and they'll call this number
and this guy will answer it support how
can I help you and they'll explain
whatever it problem they have maybe
their printer's not working or they
can't get this application to load or
something like that and it's a running
joke in the show that the answer is
always have you tried turning it off and
back on again and as cliche as that
sounds and basically they say it
thousands of times in the show it
actually is very powerful to just shut
it down and then load it back up
sometimes these tools and these software
is getting such a weird State they just
need to be refreshed or they need to be
updated something like that or sometimes
we've done something somehow unknowingly
to the settings and just turning it off
and then turning it back on will erase
that or you might want to even just
start from scratch starting from scratch
especially if you've even gone that far
can be really powerful because sometimes
you just press the wrong button and
you're never going to fix it in that
file I know that sounds silly I know
that sounds dumb that you should be able
to turn everything off but I'm sometimes
a Believer if I'm not that far I'm just
going to restart all right or if I am
far and I just can't get this one
section to work can I get this one
section to work on a separate file so
not completely restarting but just
restarting that one part so when you
have a bug one of the best things that
you can do is turn it off turn it back
on does it work sometimes it works
sometimes it doesn't at this point we've
tried a lot for step eight we're going
to do a little bit different so far
everything I've told you the last seven
steps have been stuff that we can just
do on our own that we can try to solve
on our own but if you've done all of
those things and you still are having no
luck first off I'm sorry that sucks I've
definitely been where you're at and it
is not fun place to be but that means we
also need to talk to someone else at
this point so in Step 8 I want you to
take a screenshot taking a screenshot is
absolutely amazing and very powerful
because is a picture's worth a thousand
words right and so if you can give
someone that context of actually what's
going on
double the points if you make it a gif
or a screen recording that actually
shows some movement right that can be
really helpful for whoever is trying to
solve your problem it's really hard to
know what's going on you've done a you
know hopefully a good job of copying and
pasting the air and everything but
sometimes you just need a screenshot a
screenshot is going to like I say be
worth a thousand words it's going to
tell me what type of computer you're
using a lot of the times like I can tell
if this is a Mac or is this a Windows
it's going to show me what other windows
you have open it's going to show maybe
the code so for instance if you're using
SQL show the code as well as the result
engine at the bottom so I can see all of
it same in Python I'm going to be able
to see maybe things in your code that
aren't in the the error message or
something like that but basically
sending a whole screenshot is going to
be very valuable and going to help
whoever you're asking we're going to
talk about the people that you can ask
right now there is a few different
people you could ask if you're facing a
bug here are the three people you could
reach out to a co-worker or a peer they
might be able to help you your boss or a
mentor they might be able to help you
and then third an online Forum or stack
Overflow those are all really good
resources to ask if you hit a technical
bug now that we're asking someone else
step nine we also want to include the
systems that we are using so if it's not
obvious from the screenshot if this is
Mac Linux windows we need to say what
type of you know operating system we're
using and also often what computer we
are using as well especially now with
these new Macs these new Macs have these
awesome new chips in them but those
chips don't necessarily play nicely with
all these different tools and softwares
that have existed for many years so if
you're especially if you're using a Mac
you have to say what Mac you're using
and what chip is on the inside because
that'll make a huge difference in the
troubleshooting process you also want to
double check your versioning so like for
instance what version of Tableau are you
using are using the latest or is it an
older version if it's a library what
version of the library in Python are we
using we want to give all the details
once again we want to over share here
and basically explain to the person we
are talking about this our whole setup
what computer what operating system what
version of the software give them as
much details as possible because that
can be playing a huge role in this
troubleshooting process please step 10
when you've done this whole process and
you're using someone else right you're
using their time and they're probably
helping you for free so in Step 10 we
want to make sure that we say thank you
it's important to be kind especially in
Internet forums where it's so easy to be
rude and just Anonymous we want to be
kind and say thank you and be
appreciative of other people's times
because debugging is not a fun process
debugging someone else's problem is not
a fun process and then also if we get
the help we want we want to pay it
forward you know we remember how much it
sucks to be in this debugging situation
and so if someone has the opportunity to
ask you for some help with some
troubleshooting on a debugging problem
you want to be able to help them you
want to be able to pass it forward and
there you have it my 10-step guide to
debugging a data air I hope you enjoyed
that episode and if you did I'm gonna
have an awesome free free masterclass
that I know you're going to love we're
going to talk about a lot of things this
episode talked about you can get it
absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: FREE 5-Step SQL Course & Project

Description: In this episode, Avery‚Äôs going to walk you through how you can teach yourself SQL for FREE with this awesome 5-step course.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Timestamps:
0:24 - What is SQL?
1:08 - Step 1: Download Datasets
2:03 - What is CSV files?
2:44 - Step 2: Setup SQL environment with the dataset
3:37 - Step 3: Learn SQL for free with W3Schools
4:50 - Step 4: Come up w/ probing questions for your data
6:09 - Step 5: Write up your findings
7:00 - Project Write-up Platform

Mentioned Links:
Kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets
bit.io: https://bit.io/
W3Schools: https://www.w3schools.com/sql/



Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I'm going to walk you through
how you can learn SQL for free with this
five-step course it's going to be
awesome sql's very powerful so let's go
ahead and hop into it welcome to the
data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith SQL is
awesome you guys it is like a superpower
and it is the most in-demand data
analyst skill that you could possibly
learn if you didn't know SQL stands for
structured query language and like I
said it's awesome but it is a little bit
scary because it does have that L word
inside of it which is the language which
means it is definitely kind of a
programming language which is a step up
from Excel a step up from Tableau a step
up from Power bi but it's something well
worth learning if you want to be a data
analyst or have any sort of data career
it is really the probably the most used
thing that us data career people use but
it is hard especially when you're
getting started but have no fear today
I'm going to be giving you a five-step
crash course on SQL that will help you
do your own SQL projects and learn SQL
along the way so the first step you want
to do is go to kaggle.com that is
k-a-g-g-l-e.com this is an awesome data
science website one of the really cool
features is they have literally tens of
thousands of different data sets and so
you go to the data set part of their
website and actually just search all the
data sets that they have it's like a
data set search engine it is one of my
go-to places for getting data sets and
search for whatever data set you're
interested in you know if you're
interested in sports search for sports
if you're interested in stocks there's
great stock data there animals whatever
you're interested in it doesn't matter
trees mountains There is almost a data
set for everything that you could
possibly need on kaggle so go find some
interesting data that looks interesting
now it doesn't have to be any sort of
SQL form right here we're just trying to
find the data in fact for this tutorial
what I'm teaching you it's actually
better if it's just a CSV it'll just be
a little bit simpler so CSV is a comma
separated value file it's very similar
to a text file or an Excel file and
that's the majority of the time that's
what is actually on kaggle.com is CSV
files so find a data set that you're
interested in and and download it now
once you have it downloaded we're going
to put it in SQL and usually that's a
little bit of a difficult task because
one of the hardest parts of actually
using SQL is getting it downloaded and
getting it to actually work on your
machine those two steps actually make
SQL really difficult sometimes so when
you're just starting out or when you're
not that experienced we're going to skip
those steps we're going to make it a
little bit easier for you so what I want
you to do is go to bit dot IO this is a
website I found that allows you to
upload csvs and transform them into SQL
databases and then query those databases
online all for free without even a login
I'm pretty sure which is absolutely
amazing so if you go to bit.io you
should be able to upload your CSV there
and that will make it into a SQL
database and give you a SQL engine that
you can then type commands to
that can query that or give you the
results all that good stuff it's just
like any sort of sequel like my sequel
or MySQL workbench or SQL Lite or
anything like that it's just instead of
being on your computer it's in the cloud
and it's really easy to access so we
don't want you to go through that
headache of having to figure out how to
install SQL in it not working and
getting the CSV to the SQL data so if
you use bit.io that will take away the
stress and just make it a lot easier
okay after you've done that you still
need to learn SQL of course but the good
news is there's lots of free ways to
learn SQL online one of my favorites is
W3 if you just Google W3 SQL that will
be one of the first links and just click
on it it's green and it basically will
have anything you need to learn about
SQL and you can just learn it all
through there it even has like a try it
yourself button which allows you to try
out some of the queries and see how they
work on your own go through a couple of
the lessons their SQL is very deep but
also you can learn quite a bit pretty
easily at the beginning and you can
follow my favorite 13 SQL queries that
will help you pretty much learn
everything that you need to learn those
keywords or those Clauses or those
commands are select from where Group by
order by like count Max or Min or both
average case when join distinct and
having those are the 13 that I would
focus on all those lessons should be
there pretty easily to find in W3 I
would go through all 13 of those and get
a feel for you know what's going on this
is probably going to take two to four
hours so make sure you get you know
block out the time get a feel for it but
once you're feeling okay with it we're
going to go back to bits.io with our new
data set and we're going to ask some
interesting questions for our data
whatever the data set you picked whether
it's animals or police data or Sports
data whatever ask questions like how
many of this or how many of that or what
was the total or what was the average
groups and categories is another one
look for a column in your data set that
groups the rows together did this group
have on average more something than this
one how did this category affect this
other variable those are good questions
that you can ask how do these things
compare you know look at these subsets
of rows what trends do we see over time
what was the most what was the least
those are the type of questions you'll
want to be asking your data and you ask
those questions write them down and then
try to use SQL to solve those questions
so once again you're going to be using
the select the from the where the group
by the order by count all that good
stuff all those SQL commands I just
taught you just barely you learned on W3
use those to answer the questions that
you come up with and there you go you're
building your first SQL project without
even realizing it which is awesome you
found the data on your own you learned
SQL on the side you mix the two together
and that's how you can create your own
project do your own SQL course right
there okay then last step is the most
important most people ignore it so don't
ignore it and that is to do a write-up
of your findings talk about this
experience where did you learn about the
data set what data set did you choose
why did you choose it where did you
learn SQL what questions did you ask
that you wanted to answer in the data
set how did you answer those questions
what were the SQL queries take
screenshots of your SQL queries whatever
you do you just need to make sure you
basically write a blog or like an
article that explains this whole process
and documents your learning because it's
all about documenting not creating when
it comes to content creation and also
keep in mind that if you just put SQL on
your resume that's not nearly as
powerful as having this project be on
your portfolio which you can do like I
said in probably one day we're talking I
don't know six hours you could probably
knock this whole thing out from scratch
too like if you've already used SQL
you've already used kaggle you're
probably going to do this a lot faster
now in terms of write-up one of my
favorite is using LinkedIn articles it's
just really easy and it's baked into
LinkedIn so you don't have to like go
anywhere else or create anything else
you'll give an intro to the data write
the answers to your question questions
conclude and then post it online make
sure you share it tag someone put it on
your resume whatever just like show
people and that is all you need that is
a free SQL course right there and just
five simple steps don't over complicate
this I know you guys can do this and I
believe in you and if you do it end up
tagging me on LinkedIn Avery Smith or
wherever you listen to this podcast you
can write a comment in the podcast or a
review or you can also find me on
Instagram at datacareerjumpstart I hope
you enjoyed that episode and if you did
I'm gonna have an awesome free
masterclass that I know you're going to
love we're going to talk about a lot of
things this episode talked about you can
get it absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: Navigating Your Data Career Journey w/ Jess Ramos

Description: In this episode, Avery & Jess Ramos dive deep into the world of data careers and discuss tips and tricks to network effectively, switch jobs, and stay focused on your career goals.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Timestamps:
0:00 - Background + Jess's Intro
8:01 - Difference between risk analyst & data analyst
9:56 - Does a math degree help in the data field? 
12:52 - You hate your job. What do you do? 
17:05 - It‚Äôs OK to switch jobs!
18:07 - The best time to switch job
20:06 - Not landing job opportunities? Do this!
22:44 - Learn less. Apply more. 
25:15 - Know your data terms to land the job!

Jess Ramos Links:
üëî Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jessramosmsba
üì∏ Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/jessramosdata
üéûÔ∏è Linkedin Course: https://www.linkedin.com/learning/preparing-for-your-analytics-job-interview/data-analytics-from-initial-interest-to-job-interview
üìñ Practical Advice for Perfecting the Data Resume: https://gumroad.com/a/51884243/vijuf

üì∏ Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/datacareerjumpstart

Video Transcript:
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast in this episode I
had the pleasure of talking to Jess
Ramos we had a really fun discussion
about what we would do in certain
different data career situations so if
you're in this situation making this
much money or if you wanted to learn
this how would you learn this it was a
really fun conversation and I think
you're really going to enjoy it this is
the data career podcast episode 49.
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast I'm super excited
for my guest today it's the fabulous
Jess Ramos and if you guys have never
met her or heard about her definitely
check out her links in the show notes
down below so you guys can connect with
her on social Jess is a senior data
analyst at crunchbase she is a Masters
in Business analytics from the
University of Georgia I went to Georgia
Tech so we're enemies but it's okay
she's a data influencer with over 70 000
followers on LinkedIn and also a
LinkedIn learning instructor overall
she's a great representative of the data
community and the women in data
community and I'm stoked that she's here
Jess welcome to the podcast hi I'm super
happy to be here
awesome thanks so much for coming on I
just wanted to like quickly give the
people who maybe aren't familiar with
you a chance to get to know you a little
bit so you want to tell us a little bit
about what you do now and where your
journey started and how you've
progressed in your data career yeah so
where I am now I'm a senior data analyst
at crunchbase so I'm definitely just
really passionate about the tech space
and I'm doing a lot of different types
of analytics work that I've never done
before so that's really exciting I'm
doing a lot of product experimentation
I'm doing some data warehouse work
building metrics and kpis I'm really
working with a lot of different
stakeholders to drive these product
experiments and decide what we're going
to do with our product and how we can
get the most success out of our product
features so that's been really fun and
for those who don't know can you tell
them what crunchbase is yes the shortest
words possible crunchbase is a data
company with company data so we
basically have a lot of company data we
have data on like the investors of the
companies the funding rounds they've
gone through different contacts of the
company so it's a really good platform
to use if you're in like the prospecting
space so if you work in sales or even
for job Seekers It's good to see if a
company has funding before you go there
yeah that is perfect definition it's a
big deal guys she's underselling it but
this is like the company to go get
information about other companies
especially in the startup and like seed
round and Venture Capital world
crunchbase is the go-to company so she's
underselling it it's an awesome company
so how I got started in my data career I
I took an info systems class in
undergrad and that's where I was first
exposed to data I didn't even know that
data was a career choice and I just
really liked it so from there I did a
directed study in data analytics with
that same professor and I didn't even
need the class to graduate I did it just
because I wanted to learn more and that
led to an on-campus job kind of an
internship where I was getting to learn
R so I basically got paid to learn R and
learn how to clean data and that was my
first like data project and while I was
there I decided to apply for grad school
and while I was in grad school I got an
internship at a local fintech startup
and that's where I really found my love
for the startup in fintech space
awesome that's very cool I want to hone
in on one of the things that you just
said because for everyone who's
listening who hasn't come to my free
data Career Training go ahead and click
the link in the show notes down below
but one of the slides in that
presentation is there's three ways to
learn data analytics one you can learn
for free there's like a ton of stuff on
YouTube there's a lot of stuff on
LinkedIn stack Overflow you can learn
for free the second one is to you know
go and pay to learn which you know you
did and I did as well and we both have
master's degrees in the analytics space
obviously that cost a lot more than free
it's typically tens of thousands of
dollars here in the United States or you
can get paid to learn and that sounds
like you did a little bit of that as
well where you got this job and they
were like paying you to do the job and
you were learning are on the job do you
mind just diving into like how you got
connected to that because I think
everyone would choose how to get paid to
learn right but it's hard to get your
foot in the door so how did you get so
lucky to get paid to learn r
yeah so honestly it was through
networking and Outreach this job did not
fall into my lap I was looking for a job
to have my senior year uh at my senior
year in undergrad and I was just like
reaching out to different people on
campus hey I'm looking for a job on
campus I'm really interested in data and
I actually was looking at the admissions
office because I thought that would be
an interesting place to work and the
woman who worked in the admissions
office her husband worked in enrollment
management and he actually needed
someone to do some data work for him so
it was totally through connections and
Outreach and just word of mouth but it
was really awesome to get paid to learn
it was my first like little project to
put on my resume and looking back it
wasn't like a super impressive project
or anything but it just ignited like
this fire and me for data
I I love that because a lot of people
when they're trying to get their foot in
the door they think it's about skills
and it is like you have to have at least
some skills right but it's maybe more
important who you know and not even like
who you know but who you could know like
that can make a really big difference to
getting your foot in the door and
getting that situation like you said
maybe it wasn't the most impressive
project of all time but it's a project
and it's on your resume and that was
your building block to Landing your next
job which was at the internship at the
fintech and then you got the master's
degree and then where'd you go from
there so my internship with the fintech
they actually hired me
so I didn't have to do a super extensive
job search for my first job which was a
huge blessing I got a lot of experience
there and I was able to get promoted
twice while I was there to a manager
position so it was honestly a little
lucky but it was a really good setup for
my career
okay wow so basically after two years
you got put into a manager position yeah
it's very uncommon but yeah it was a
small company though it was only 40
people but I was managing one full-time
person and then an intern as well did
you like being a manager I did I think
that it was really fun being able to
Mentor people so the two women that came
in behind me they also came from my same
Masters program so it was cool to see
myself and them they were just like a
year behind me and then two years behind
where I was so it's really cool to
Mentor them and be able to teach them
everything I knew and there's still
people I talk to all the time I'm still
really close with them I realized I was
like I'm a manager at such a young age
and I don't feel like I'm fully
developed as an analyst yet like I still
have so much that I myself need to learn
that when I was looking for my next role
I applied for a few manager positions
just for fun but I was like I really
want to go back to an IC an individual
contributor role because I really wanted
to grow myself
awesome yeah that's really cool that you
like saw that about yourself that is a
phrase I've been hearing more and more
you guys an individual contributor that
just means someone who basically is
actually doing work versus like managing
people doing work and it often is
abbreviated I see like just said so then
you did that and landed was it a senior
data analyst role at that point so the
next role I landed was a senior risk
Analyst at Freddie Mac okay the fintech
company I was at before was in like the
mortgage space and Freddie Mac just
seemed like a natural flow for me to
utilize my previous mortgage technology
business domain and I really just wanted
to try a bigger company I knew in my
heart that I was a startup person
because I love like fast-paced work but
I was like I want to try a corporate
company because I haven't tried it so I
can't really say I don't like it so it
felt like it felt like a growing
opportunity
and how did it go it was not my favorite
okay yeah I learned very quickly I think
I learned the lessons I needed to learn
there super quickly and I learned that
I'm much happier in a smaller company
and and more of a startup environment
and that's where you're at with
crunchbase now as a senior data analyst
yep and I moved to crunchbase and I'm
super happy that's awesome can you talk
to the difference between the risk
analyst and like the data analyst role
did you feel like even though it was a
risk analyst title did you did it was it
like could it have been a data analyst
title or are there some differences
there I think there are some differences
I think it was pretty close to data
analyst role I think the difference is
that the problems were more risk focused
so the product that I was working on it
was actually a product that was being
launched like three years in the future
which is like crazy to me coming from a
startup background but it was based on
like condo risk so like evaluating risk
of condo buildings so it was pretty much
like data analysts work I think the work
was pretty much the same but the
business domain was different because
all of the business problems and
stakeholders were risk focused
yeah it's really interesting because
sometimes you'll see these titles that
have the word analyst in them and
sometimes they're basically just a data
analyst role applied to the domain and
sometimes they're not even like really
what I would consider an analyst role so
it's so confusing sometimes what these
different roles can mean that's good to
hear that you felt like you were still
doing data stuff just applied to that
Financial background and by the way I
forgot to ask you studied math in school
is that right yes I had a double major
in math in Spanish and then I minored in
business
okay interesting and your minor I'm
assuming that's when you took that
information systems is class right yeah
I did a business minor because I didn't
really know what else to do and I took
that class because I heard it was an
Easy A and I just wanted to like get an
easy a and get the credit and little did
I know it set up my whole career yeah
that's crazy I wonder if you didn't do
the business minor if you just did math
in Spanish I wonder what you would have
done
I have no idea because up until I
learned about data analytics I truly had
no idea what I wanted to do I might have
gone to grad school for math or
something which wouldn't have been
terrible but I just didn't want to end
up in Academia
yeah for sure which is often the case
for people who study math a lot of the
time by the way do you feel like your
math degree helps you in the data field
or is it like not a factor I think 1 000
and I tell people like you don't have to
be a math expert you don't have to know
like super complicated math to work in
analytics so I don't want this to
intimidate people or gatekeep in any
sort of way but I do think having a math
degree helps me a lot I think first of
all it adds like a lot of credibility to
me I think interviewing when hiring
managers see that I majored in math they
already know that I can solve problems
they know I can work with numbers and
not be scared to get my hands dirty so I
think that really helped me just elevate
my credibility while interviewing but I
also think the skills I learned it
wasn't like the
it wasn't like the the equations and the
theorems like those things aren't what I
really use on The Daily it rewired my
brain and taught me how to think so
being able to think logically think
through assumptions and limitations and
then of course just like basic logic
anytime you're coding or in SQL in your
filtering data you're adding booleans
like it's all math so I think it was
pretty easy for me to pick that stuff up
because I've already taken a bunch of
like discrete mathematics and proofs
classes
yeah I think you said it very well that
you know when it comes to does having a
math degree help you in the data field
the answer is yes it does help you but
you don't necessarily need one it's an
added bonus and it's going to make life
easier for you but you can still go get
through your day to Career without the
math degree I think you said that that
really well okay perfect so that's just
a little bit about Jess you guys like I
said if you guys haven't connected with
her go ahead and check her out in the
show notes down below we're gonna go
ahead and play a game now together Jess
if you're okay with that does that sound
good I'm down let's do it okay I've
never played this game on the podcast so
hopefully this works out but what we're
gonna do with Jess is we're going to
play a career scenarios game where I'm
going to present Jess with a scenario
that you might be in your career or
maybe it's your uncle or your cousin
these random people and we're gonna see
we're gonna present the situation to
Jess and then Jess is going to tell us
what she thinks that she would do if she
was in that situation and then maybe
I'll give my thoughts about what I would
do if I was in that situation and we'll
compare and contrast and see if we have
similar explanations and suggestions or
maybe we have a different take a
different approach hopefully of
different approaches so at least it's a
little bit interesting to hear both of
us
yes let's go so the first one is about
Sally
now Sally just graduated with an
accounting degree and she went to work
for one of the the big accounting firms
Deloitte she was really excited to start
her job she was really passionate about
accounting but now she's five minutes or
five minutes in five months into her job
and she's not in love she feels like the
task that she's given aren't necessarily
her favorite she's just not as excited
to go into work every day and she's just
losing a little bit of the spark so what
would you do Jess if you were Sally I've
actually been in a similar situation I
have been in a role before we're pretty
close to starting I realized it really
wasn't a great fit I wasn't really
learning as much as I wanted to it
wasn't a place I wanted to be long term
and I think if you're already having
those doubts at the beginning it's a
clear sign that you're not super happy
you should never be like oh I need to
stay a year and then I'll leave at a job
like you should never see like a
deadline on when you want to leave your
job if you're starting to count down and
think about leaving it means you're
probably ready to leave so I would tell
Sally to figure out why she doesn't like
her job is it the type of work she's
doing
is it the culture because I know Big
Four has very traditional corporate
cognitive machine culture and I think if
Sally Narrows in on why she's not happy
she can figure out what she wants to do
next and my advice would not be to wait
because life is too short No One's Gonna
care if you left your job quickly as
long as you
as long as you have the right skills and
someone's willing to hire you no one's
going to look back and care that you
left a job quickly
yeah I agree with that a lot of what you
said I think narrowing it down to
figuring out why she's not happy is
really important because it's hard to
diagnose this this comes back to the
troubleshooting process that you just
talked about there but if you're not
happy at your job try to figure out why
and then play with the variables one at
a time to see if you can fix it you
might think it's my co-workers maybe you
try to go hang out with some other
co-workers afterwards or maybe it's your
boss and one of the things I think I
wish I had did better in the past is
when I'm not happy letting my boss know
like communicating with my boss because
I think a lot of the times I
feel certain emotions inside of me and
this is true at work now I'm My Own Boss
so sometimes I am mad at me but like
even outside of work like I I'm very
active in my church and I do a lot of a
church service and one of the things I
do for our church is I like send out
these text messages every week and the
guy who's like in charge of like me in
the situation the other day I was just
like super frustrated I was like I don't
know what the heck I'm supposed to be
doing and I was feeling all this
resentment inside of me and then finally
I realized man I have this unhealthy
habit of just kind of holding that
resentment in and not saying anything
and so I just texted him and I said hey
look like I want to be doing my best
here but I don't really know what I'm
supposed to be doing I'm not really
finding a lot of satisfaction in this
and he's okay let's make some changes so
that we can make it work I think in the
past I've been too slow to bring up the
questions and just say how I'm feeling
now some companies are going to react
better to that than other companies but
I just want to focus on communication I
think that's one thing Sally could focus
on does that make sense oh yeah for sure
and communication is something I really
learned in my last job I had pretty
solid first job out of grad school I
didn't really have a lot of conflicts or
issues I think I was really lucky for
experiencing that so at my last job at
Freddie Mac I did have to learn a lot of
communication skills I had to have hard
conversations with my manager and you
know talk about the kind of work that I
was told I'd be doing and what I really
wanted to be doing and I think it's
really hard to bring those conversations
up with your manager especially if you
don't have a good rapport and
relationship built up but it's
definitely worth it to bring it up and
speak your mind otherwise you're just
going to bottle a resentment and be
unhappy and they might have no idea that
you're unhappy
yeah and it's hard because maybe they
would fix it if they knew that you were
unhappy and then going back off of what
you said about not being worried to
leave your job early it's something I
agree with as well I agree Life's Too
Short now there are some
let's say an older generation than me
and you because we're pretty young I'm
27 I don't know how old you're how old
you are but you're pretty young as well
um and there there are some people who
are older who maybe believe that you
should have a little bit more of
accountability to your company and stuff
like that and they might judge you but
that being said I'm getting older and
people my age are becoming more managers
and stuff like that and yeah like
eventually that will go away but also I
actually think that staying in your
current job especially if you hate it
can actually be holding you back from
making more money and one of the best
examples of this on LinkedIn is Zach
Wilson he's never worked for a company
he just left he just left Airbnb he's
never stated a company like longer than
20 months and every time he left a
company he got a huge race now there was
some companies he's talked about this on
LinkedIn like I think he was
interviewing with Robin Hood the Stock
Investing app and they were like you
jump shipped way too often we're not
interested so that does happen but then
there's companies like Airbnb who are
like sweet we're in we don't care and I
just think he's got a pay grade every
time he made one of those jumps and so
really a lot of the times when you're
making one of these jumps but I would
never advise to jump without a plan
right but a lot of the times the plan B
is actually better than plan A
yeah I agree and I think with Zach
Wilson's case too I think he just has
such a big platform he's a high profile
person so I'm sure that people at Robin
Hood might have been more in tune with
like his past salaries and he is someone
that does support career switching every
20 months or so but I think for someone
without as high of a profile I don't
think an employer would really even
blink an eye I think it's a lot more
common nowadays to switch jobs more
often and I'm not saying switch like
crazy like you want to have a certain
amount of loyalty to your company but at
the end of the day it is a job I love
crunchbase I love my job but I know they
could lay me off tomorrow they have the
power to cut me if they want to so I do
just always want to make sure that I'm
looking out for what's best for me and I
will say too in the past like I
have doubled a little over doubled my
salary within an 11 month time span and
a lot of that was through negotiating my
current salary up to market value and
then making a job switch so it really is
worth it to switch every
I don't want to even put a number on it
but once you I don't want to put a
number on it because I don't want I
don't want angry DMS but once you start
to get to the point to where you've
maxed out that role and you're not
learning as much and you're not growing
it's probably time for a switch you'll
probably make more money and learn new
skills I think if I wouldn't have left
my first job which I loved I loved the
people I love the role but I just maxed
out the role there wasn't really a whole
lot more for me to learn and I think if
I wouldn't have left it I think that I
just wouldn't have learned as much
because I learned so many valuable
experiences at Freddie Mac and then out
crunchbase like this is the most
challenging and advanced work I have
done in my career and I'm so like happy
and motivated by it that's awesome Sally
we advise you to try to fix it if you
can have good communication but if it's
if you've spent three months of trying
to have good communication
Don't Be Afraid yes sayonara get out
Sally yeah okay hopefully that helps
imaginary salary Sally salary and
hopefully you get a bigger salary too
okay number two scenario here this is a
guy imaginary Ben so Ben has been
applying for data jobs
for the last little bit but has not been
getting any bites what do you do if
you're Ben
so I was Ben actually about six to eight
months ago but if you're not getting any
bites you need to figure out like at
what point in the interview process are
you getting cut because that is like the
root of the problem if you're not
getting any recruiter calls it means
that it might be your resume or your
lack of Outreach on LinkedIn so if
you're not getting any recruiter calls
at all you need to beef up your resume
make sure it is tailored to the role in
Industry you're targeting and don't just
code apply and sit back reach out on
LinkedIn if you apply to a company go
find a recruiter a data analytics
manager someone make contact with a
human and that's how you get more
interviews if you're not getting past
the recruiter round it means that maybe
you're throwing up a red flag somewhere
maybe something you're saying isn't like
Landing well maybe you're not convincing
them that you have the necessary skills
because recruiters are just making sure
you have the basics for the role so
maybe it's like a little bit of a
education issue or something you're
saying is just not sitting well with
them
if you're not getting past the hiring
manager this is the problem I had when I
was interviewing right before I got my
job at crunchbase
it might be because you're not
communicating your value well enough and
it might not be that you don't have the
right skills it might just be that it's
more of a communication and like value
proposition issue so just make sure you
practice the star method and
communicating the results and impact of
your projects
or it could also be that maybe you're
throwing up a red flag somewhere which I
realized for me that the way I was
explaining why I was leaving my last job
was not the best look from a hiring
manager's point of view so I had to look
through all of my interviews and be like
I keep flying through to the hiring
manager and I'm not moving past what's
wrong and then I changed up the way I
explain why I was leaving my last job
and from there the floodgates just broke
open for me
yeah what you said was very key like the
job hunt application process is a funnel
so if you're not getting any interviews
you have to think okay where do I can
apply to a job and where am I coming now
you have to think where am I getting
rejected and there's different stages
like you said you can get rejected by
the ATS at the beginning and then you're
like okay my resume or my application's
not good you can get rejected by a
recruiter a little bit later on and
maybe that's once again maybe you didn't
have a good enough LinkedIn profile or a
good enough portfolio you can bomb an
interview or fail the interview process
or something like that it's really
important to know where you're at in the
whole pipeline because what you need to
do will be based off of the feedback
you're getting I had a student the other
day who came to me and they're like I
just need to learn SQL more I'm not
getting a job because I need to learn
SQL more and I said tell me more about
that like why do you think that you're
not going to get a job because you don't
know SQL well enough and she's like I
just don't feel like I know it enough
and I was like well it's on your resume
right you have a portfolio project with
it yeah but I just don't feel like I
know it enough and I was like let the
recruiter tell you that in the interview
don't reject yourself from jobs that you
could potentially land just because
you're not confident enough in your
skills now if you get into the interview
and there's a SQL assessment and you
Bond the SQL assessment then yes maybe
it's time to get a little bit better at
SQL but I I want people to be at like
this like Edge where you know enough SQL
to get past the interview that you don't
know enough that you've spent five years
perfecting it you're right we want to
get learned how we want to get paid to
learn SQL so it's this fine line of
knowing enough but not knowing
everything optimizing that can be
difficult but I think what you said is
really important just like nowhere in
the funnel you're getting your rejection
I think that's key
totally and I'm laughing because I don't
feel like I know Sequel and I feel like
there's just always so much to learn so
that imposter syndrome is real even when
you get to more senior levels and one
more thing I wanted to add with the
communication sometimes it's like you
don't know the right words to say and
I'm not saying that you just want to say
the words that a recruiter and hiring
manager want to hear but I just mean
that there are certain like phrases that
you might know but you don't know you
know them like when I first started
interviewing I was like a hiring manager
asked me if I knew what a CTE was this
was like almost a year ago and I was
like what's a CTE can you explain it to
me and I'm pretty sure they thought I
didn't know how to do it but I didn't
know the name for it so I've been using
ctes for years with a table as whatever
yeah and you've got like a with clause
or something it is exactly I was I can
do those in my sleep I just didn't know
what they were called so I think just
making sure like the verbiage like
what's a window function a CTE Union
make sure you understand what you're
really doing and to communicate that in
a way to where a hiring manager knows
that you have the skills yeah for sure
when I was first getting my data job I
had two interviews like this is my first
day to job and they're like do you want
to do pivot tables and I was like I
don't know what that is that was not
good I don't know what those were but
then there was another one where they're
like would you ever want to make
dashboards and at the time once again
I'm brand new to data right I was like
dashboards are like in cars how do you
like make them with data I don't know
how that works we've come a long way in
our knowledge but hopefully yeah just
knowing some of the words and to be
honest sometimes I love you all my
recruiters I love you guys but sometimes
the recruiters don't actually know
anything about the tech stuff and
they're just looking for you to say yes
to certain things and they don't
actually know what a CTE is either
exactly like you have to know the right
buzzwords I'm not saying lie and say
things you don't know how to do but like
I'm in like the fintech startup software
as a service world so those are like the
buzzwords I gotta hit when I talk to a
recruiter I need them to know I have
that previous technology experience so
you got to learn how to communicate to a
recruiter who doesn't actually know what
those things are
for sure okay awesome moving on to
scenario three all right scenario three
here is a guy named Graham Graham has a
data job offer one as a data analyst
with Dow Chemical if you guys don't know
what Dow Chemical is it's a big Chemical
Company Corporation that's gonna pay
really well it's gonna pay a hundred and
two thousand dollars a year a beautiful
campus a three percent 401K match like
really good benefits really good brand
recognition on your resume or he has
another one this one's with germ Tech
and it's for a hundred and twenty
thousand dollars this is a startup
company so they're gonna pay a little
bit more but there's bad not really good
health care there's no 401K match the
office and the office equipment's not
that nice which of these jobs should
Graham take the one with Dao or the one
with germ I think it comes down to
Graham's priorities and I think it's a
decision that Graham needs to make on
his own
if I were Graham I would go all in for
the startup offer because
and I guess it depends too if this is
Graham's first job or not I started my
career in startups I have a huge passion
for them and I love how quickly you can
learn and iterate I got to do and even
now in my current role I'm getting to do
so many different kinds of projects and
I have too many projects for my resume
at this point like I've gotten to do so
many cool things and I think that's
really unique to the startup environment
so if it's like Graham's first job it
could be a great place for him to get a
ton of good experience and make himself
a more valuable candidate whenever he's
looking for his next role in the next
couple years or so I also think too 401K
match is great but there's a much higher
salary at the startup so I think that
covers the difference of what the 40k1
match would be in my opinion so Graham
could take that extra money and go
invest it himself you don't have to
necessarily have a 401k benefit he can
still invest the extra income on his own
what else do I have to say about this
oh the other thing I was thinking the
big corporation that has the campus
does Graham want to work on campus that
is my question because I don't give a
crap what kind of Campus a company has
sure maybe I'll come once or twice a
year and come visit and it'll be fun but
a campus is not a benefit in my opinion
when I hear a company has a campus and
they want me on it all the time uh no I
like working remotely
there you go you heard it you're here
first folks Jess likes the remote work
lifestyle I do
that's awesome remind me just where do
you live again I live in Athens Georgia
okay sweet yeah that's awesome yeah I'm
with you I am a work from home guy for
the most part I think I could do hybrid
but but probably two days a week I don't
think I could do three so anyways I am a
work from home guy as well I think you
dressed a lot of the important parts is
it really depends on what Graham wants
and how Graham wants to optimize his
life what I didn't tell you Jess is
Graham was actually me uh when I was
when I was when I was leaving College
this is the exact decision I had to make
when I was leaving college so I had the
option to go to work for Exxon Mobil
instead of Dao and make like 102 and a
half thousand dollars or something like
that in Houston Texas or stay at the
company the little biotech startup that
I was at
um in Salt Lake City Utah that was not
called germ Tech it was called Vapor
sense and make 120 000 and I chose Exxon
Mobil so I'll tell you what I reasons I
chose that like the big Corporation one
I had never worked for a big corporate
in my life and so I was like I think I
need to go try that out and see if I
like it because at the startup like I
didn't have a good desk I didn't have a
good computer stuff like that and I was
like I want and I had I actually
interned for Exxon level before and I
loved
like the desk was the nicest desk and I
had the most beautiful office View and
they fed me like three times a week and
I was like this is awesome I love this
so that was important to me in hindsight
I think I would have I it turns out I
hated working for a corporation I did
feel like a cog in the machine
personally that was just for me my
personality it was not a good fit so I'm
looking back on it I probably if I was
like optimizing everything I probably
would have stayed with the startup but
who knows I'm grateful for my
experiences that I had and the
opportunities I had to learn and I
learned a whole lot of a lot and I
learned different things than I would
have learned at the startup as well so I
don't regret anything but an interesting
scenario where I took less money
I guess another thing that I'm grateful
for is I have the brand recognition on
my resume ExxonMobil has been the
biggest company in the world before it's
not right now obviously but like it's a
huge it's a huge name not in Tech though
which is frustrating but it's still like
a ginormous organization and having that
on my resume never hurts so anyways kind
of a fun fact I wanted to hear your
advice that you would have given to
younger Avery back in the day kudos to
you though for taking the lower offer I
think a lot of people just look at the
like price tag like they just look at
the salary and that's like what they
weighed the most for their decision but
you went for a lower salary and you
recognize that the brand recognition the
career development and like these other
perks were more important to you which
is funny that they like convinced you
with a nice desk but this is pre-covered
yep for sure and and also I wanted to
move out of Utah so that was a big deal
and Texas I don't know what it's like in
Georgia but Texas is like dirt cheap you
like the actual like money when you like
put it in there's a website that's what
is the salary worth in this city versus
this city the salary was actually pretty
similar because the buying power in
Texas just goes a lot further but yeah
money is a big part of life but it's not
everything in life so you got to
optimize your life on different aspects
yeah that's really impressive too that
you had two offers that high for your
first job out of school my starting
salary was in the 70 to 80 range which
is not a bad starting salary but
not quite six figures
but I think the awesome thing is like
even if you do take a lower offer
there's so much room in this field to
move up and once you get those skills it
doesn't matter what your starting salary
is you can just grow your salary
exponentially yeah 100 at Vapor sense
where they basically offered me a
hundred and twenty thousand I started
there as a lab technician making twelve
dollars an hour so I went from twelve
dollars an hour to 60. so that's like a
5x and I did that with just uh if you
want to know the exact Story come to my
free data training I walk through the
whole story but basically I did it with
a project and with a network and
narrowing down my skills SBN method do
those three things you can lead off to a
good place okay Jess those were our
three scenarios we want to talk through
today thank you for your advice you
definitely helped Sally Ben and Graham
through their decisions I appreciate it
it was a lot of fun I'm glad I helped
out Graham I mean Avery with his
decision yeah he just you're just like a
couple years too late but other than
that yeah it's very useful anyway is any
last parting words for our listeners
where can they find you
I am mostly on LinkedIn so you can find
me on LinkedIn I just actually announced
my Instagram about a week ago so you can
find me on Instagram now as Jess Ramos
data I'll be posting some data tips in
the form of video content and some
mediocre comedy so follow me there I'm
also working on some really cool
resources to do with resumes and I have
my LinkedIn course out which is designed
to help people searching for a data
analytics job I hope you enjoyed that
episode and if you did I'm gonna have an
awesome free masterclass that I know
you're going to love we're going to talk
about a lot of things this episode
talked about you can get it absolutely
for free at datacrejumpster.com training
or using the link in the show notes down
below hope to see you there

Title: Roadmap To Your First Data Job in 2023

Description: The demand for data professionals continues to rise, and with this roadmap, you can break into the data field and kick-start your career in 2023.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:

1:07 - Different background, different roadmap
3:18 - Ultimate roadmap to land your first data job
4:18 - You need these 3 skills to be marketable in data space
8:51 - Stop learning. Start applying
10:52 - Prove your skills by doing portfolio projects
12:25 - Network is your net worth
13:38 - This is how you grow your Linkedin network
16:00 - Do it scared, what‚Äôs the worst thing that could happen?



Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I'm going to walk you through my
roadmap to help you land your First Data
job I'm going to tell you what skills
you need to know and what other two
things that you can do to actually land
that job even if you have no prior
experience this is the data career
podcast episode 48. welcome to the data
career podcast the podcast that helps
aspiring data professionals land their
next data job here's your host Avery
Smith
me a road map to land My First Data job
I get that question quite a bit and it's
a question that I love and it's a
question that I hate and in this episode
I'll explain why I love I'll explain why
I hate it and I'll also give you the
answer to what is your roadmap to land
in your first day to job so first off I
get this question all the time like five
times a day in my LinkedIn inbox and
it's really hard to answer because
everyone is in such a different
circumstance if you think about what a
roadmap actually is like what it means
in like terms of like actually having a
road map like in terms of navigation you
always have you know your beginning
point and then your end point right your
origination station and then your
destination and the hard thing is is
we're all different I mean that's the
beauty of life right but we all have
different backgrounds and we're all
starting from different places for
example I was in college when I started
my my data career I was really
interested in data but I was in college
and that might be a different roadmap
than someone who's starting their data
Journey when they're 55 years old they
have a lot more experience a lot Lots
less of their career ahead of them and
so the steps they might take to land the
data job might have been different than
the steps that I took and they might
want to end up in a different situation
or you might want to end up in a
different situation for example some of
you guys might just be like oh I really
want to be you know a tableau dashboard
maker and I'm going to love that career
and some of you guys are gonna be like
that would be so boring I want to be a
senior machine learning engineer for
Facebook or something like that and the
destinations are going to affect how
your roadmap is and how you actually get
from your point a where you're at right
now to your point B your destination and
so it's really hard to give general
advice when everyone's backgrounds and
starting points is so different and
their angles are so different so it's
really hard question to actually answer
especially when you're trying to you
know talk to multiple people at once
because everyone's starting from a
different place I help a lot of teachers
you know being in a teacher position
making forty thousand dollars a year in
the United States and having to be in
the classroom for 10 hours a day is a
lot different of a position to start
from than someone who's working remotely
at ninety thousand dollars as an
environmental engineer you know the
teacher would be stoked to get to sixty
five thousand dollars and you know three
days in the office for example in that
type of hybrid role when the engineer
who might be already remote already
making more money might not be as
interested in that roadmap and so you'll
have to take different steps to get to
different places and there's lots of
different ways to get there as well like
there's not just one way to become a
machine learning engineer or to become a
data scientist or to become a data
analyst there's lots of different
options and it depends on how long you
want it to take and how much money you
want it to cost and what you want to do
along the way what you're willing to
give up and what you're willing to you
know invest it really depends so it's a
really difficult question to answer but
if I'm going to give you general advice
this is what it would be okay you have
to focus on the SPN method all of your
data career search is going to be part
of the SBN method now if you've never
heard of the ESPN method I have a whole
hour long webinar you can find the link
in the description down below that you
can sign up for and I'll explain
everything more in detail than this
podcast going to be but this is the
roadmap that I would tell you to land
your data job okay so to land your data
job here's what you need to do one you
need to learn the skills the right
skills not too much of the skills just
the right amount of the skills two build
a portfolio project that showcases
everything you know and that you've done
with your data skills and three build
your network so that way you have
opportunities that can land in your lap
instead of you applying to jobs jobs can
start applying to you so let's let's
dive into that a little bit more and
understand what each one of those
different steps would entail so if
you're trying to land your First Data
job for the majority of you guys I think
you should learn three skills first the
first one is data analysis with Excel
the second one is data visualization
with Tableau and the third one is data
wrangling with SQL those are the first
three things that I would learn if I was
starting my first data job now what do I
mean by those in Excel you have to be
able to know how to do data analysis
you're going to know the majority of it
all right so you guys are gonna be like
oh I've used Excel but just make sure
you know how to do correlations in Excel
make sure you know how to make a graph
in Excel make sure you know how to do
aggregation calculations like the men
the max the average standard deviation
those types of things inside of excel
I'm not saying you have to master Excel
but just make sure you feel comfortable
analyzing data inside of that
environment the next thing once you feel
comfortable with Excel I think you
should go to tab low and start learning
data visualization the cool thing about
data visualization is it takes a swarm
of numbers just like a sea of numbers
and turns it into something meaningful
which is really important for businesses
and would make you really valuable so
what do I mean by that if you think
about a human brain we can only remember
so many numbers at once we're actually
like our brains are not that good at
Computing numbers if I told you what's
four plus seven divided by 4 times 12
you're not going to pull it off but a
computer could pull that off computer is
really good at number calculations
humans not so much we're not even very
good at remembering numbers if I told
you you know a digit 801
722-4321 like okay the ending was there
was a little easy because I made that up
but you're not going to be able to
remember phone numbers right off the bat
and some of you guys like yeah I'm
really good at that if I add you know
four more digits to the phone number it
gets a little bit harder and so on and
so forth we're actually not that good at
remembering things but we are really
good at seeing things that's one of the
best things our human skills we're able
to see and connect that to our brain and
so that's what data visualization does
is it takes a swarm of numbers and puts
it into something that our brain can
understand and that is a very valuable
skill to have and Tableau is one of the
funnest and easiest ways to do that so I
would do data visualization inside of
Tableau now why Tableau over power bi I
get that question asked quite a bit and
the answer is kind of no reason if you
want to do power bi you can instead but
for the majority of you guys Tableau is
going to be easier to get because you do
not need any sort of business email
which sometimes you do with power bi and
also power bi does not really run easily
on Mac so in my opinion I think I would
go to Tableau it's also listed in more
job descriptions than power bi so
there's really no reason to learn
powerbo over Tableau and if you've
learned one you'll learn the other
Tableau and power bi are very similar
and if you know power bi then you'll
know Tableau and if you know Tableau
you'll know power bi
it's not exactly a one-to-one ratio of
like how they work but you'll be able to
figure them out they're all very like
click and play drag and drop there's no
actual like really hard things if you've
figured out how to use a PowerPoint
before you'll be able to figure out how
to use Tableau and power bi they're very
fun so do not be worried by them you'll
be excited about them now moving up to
SQL because that is the third skill I
typically recommend that most people
should have in their roadmap SQL stands
for structured query language and it is
that it is a language so it is a step up
from Excel it is a step up from Tableau
you're no longer in that you know kind
of safe environment of the Tableau
Software or the Microsoft Excel software
you're in this whole different language
world and there's lots of different
things you know SQL can be really simple
or really complicated and so this is why
I typically recommended to learn a third
because you're going to have a little
bit of a higher learning curve than you
would excel in Tableau but hopefully
you've built up the momentum you're
feeling good you figured out Excel you
figured out Tableau and then it's time
to move to SQL SQL is really powerful
and it can be a superhero it allows you
to analyze big data sets quite easily so
you can for instance find the average of
a column now you could do that in Excel
as well but when the data gets really
big SQL becomes faster it also if you
get too big in Excel Excel can't open so
that's rough right so SQL is good for
big data and also good at combining
multiple data sets into kind of like one
data set but SQL is really powerful and
it is the most popular listed job in
data analytics roles and it's used by
data analysts data scientists data
Engineers it is one of the best things
that you could learn in your data
journey and you will never regret
learning it so that's my typical
recommendation for you learning skills
to land a data job you need to know
Excel you need to know Tableau you need
a nosql once you've learned those three
things you can stop and I don't actually
mean that like you're always going to be
learning in your data career but if
you're okay SQL you're okay at Tableau
if you're okay at Excel it's time to let
the market tell you what to do next you
know people like me can say this is what
you should learn next or that's what you
learn next but it really doesn't matter
what matters is the market what I mean
by that is someone in an interview
process saying that you don't have
enough experience with SQL okay then I
should go learn more SQL I should
practice more SQL but if you're like oh
I don't know like it says sequel I'm
okay at SQL but I don't even know if I'm
good enough at sequel so I'm not going
to apply no you have to stop doing that
that is a toxic trait to have in your
job search you are rejecting yourself
before you let anyone else do it don't
do that don't reject yourself from jobs
try to apply to a couple jobs that have
requirements of excel SQL Tableau
whatever right and see if see if you get
the interview so many people are like oh
I'm not getting interviews so I'm gonna
go take this SQL course from Coursera
what is that SQL course from Corsair
going to do it's going to be one more
course on your resume
like how does that actually change the
game how does that change your career
how does that change your life now if
you're in a sequel or if you're an
interview and there's like a SQL test
and you fail the SQL test then yeah it's
time to go take a SQL course from
Corsair or do something to get better at
SQL practice more but if you're just
taking another course from udemy that
you're like going to do half the time
like don't do it
it's very rare that taking another
course but taking one course is going to
change your data career especially with
this skill oh like I took this Excel
course and I ended my job no that's not
the stories you hear the stories you
hear are going to come from the next two
parts of the ESPN method and that is the
personal projects and the network so I'm
going to touch on those here but just to
summarize this Excel Tableau SQL in that
order ignore everything else those are
the things you need to land your First
Data job okay
on top of those you need portfolio
projects these are the evidence that you
can actually do what your resume says
you can do because I could say hey I can
you know fly 100 feet in the air and
what would you say prove it
if I can't prove it then why would you
ever trust me and so projects are the
cheat code to giving the hiring manager
to giving the recruiter to giving that
company trust that you actually are cool
that you actually have the skills that
you've developed if you don't have the
portfolio projects how are they supposed
to trust you you know resumes talk
projects walk you need to have projects
so that you can show them what you're
made out of and also projects being
confidence to you like you might think
oh I'm not that good a sequel but then
you actually use it in a project in an
applied setting outside of one of those
dumb online bot systems that do
everything for you and you're just kind
of like blah blah blah like you actually
do a project that's going to give you
confidence oh my gosh I can actually do
this projects give you confidence that
you can do data analytics so do more
projects all right put them on a
portfolio put that portfolio on your
resume your LinkedIn your cover letters
your cold messages put that everywhere
send it to everyone and say come and see
you know I'm I'm a Christian and I'm
reading the New Testament this year and
and obviously whether you believe in the
Bible or Jesus Christ you have to say
that Christ is a figure that was very
influential in the world and one thing
that Christ says often the New Testament
is come and see and that's something
that I would invite you guys to also say
come to my portfolio see the awesome
skills I have I'm awesome and my
portfolio says I'm awesome the next
thing you're going to need in your
roadmap to land your first day to job is
some sort of a network okay you need to
be building and growing your network and
people discount this a ton but I'm
telling you it's actually the most
important one so I've thought about you
know reframing the ESPN method as The
NPS because I actually think skills
matter the least you guys I actually
think it matters the least I think
network is very very important and you
can check out some episodes that I've
had in the podcast recently so I did an
interview with Chris French who talked
about Network Ace Howard also talked
about Network kadisha Brian also talked
about Network these are three data
professionals that went from being a
teacher to a data analyst
a warehouse worker to a senior data
engineer and neurology graduate to a
data analyst role so those are three
episodes that you can just listen back
on if you scroll down whatever podcast
listener you're listening in and you can
hear those there's really good
networking advice you can go through
those but if you want my short advice
about how to grow your network here's
how you're growing to do it and to be
honest 90 of you guys are going to
ignore this I promise you ninety percent
of you guys aren't going to do this
you're going to listen and then you're
going to say oh okay I don't really want
to do that and then you're not going to
do it but this is what grows your
network comments on LinkedIn every day
comment on someone else's post every day
on LinkedIn and make it meaningful don't
just say oh thank you for sharing or wow
very cool leave something that's like
substantial like three sentences that
adds value oh I tried this and it worked
here's my results or you know man in the
past I've done that but it didn't really
work the way I thought it would this is
what happened instead or oh I found this
really cool resource check out this free
resource I'd love to talk to anyone else
about it leave something meaningful for
people to actually look at
and then post about your journey twice a
week so a comment every day post about
your journey twice a week twice a week
we're talking a hundred times a year
you're going to post on LinkedIn what
you learned this week just say hey I
learned about you know linear regression
today here's how it works or I was
working on SQL today and this is the the
SQL query that I wrote pretty cool huh
like this is the data set I was doing it
on you have to be posting on LinkedIn to
be growing your network and to post on
LinkedIn just just answer this one
question what did I learn today what did
I learn this week answer that question
in a LinkedIn post and you'll start to
grow your network you know how much do
you have to grow your network some of my
students you know who have gone through
my programs have grown their network
from you know 200 connections on
LinkedIn to 20 000. do you have to go
that much definitely not they're really
successful doing it because that's one
of the things we teach inside of the
data analytics accelerator program but
everyone should be above 500 connections
on LinkedIn everyone should definitely
be above 100 connections on LinkedIn but
once you got 100 next Milestones 500
next Milestones a thousand that's that's
all you you need and why do we need to
grow our Network because your network is
your net worth in your data Journey your
network is your net worth it is not what
you know it's who you know and I would
edit that to be it's who you could know
because a lot of you guys are like oh I
don't have a network I don't know
anybody well get knowing somebody right
the best time to plant a tree was five
years ago the next best time is
yesterday or today sorry so start
growing your network today that is the
key all right and you might feel weird
doing it you might feel embarrassed
doing it you might be worried doing it
well do it and do it embarrassed do it
scared one of my favorite students
inside of the data analytics accelerator
program is Samantha Paul you guys should
definitely check her out on LinkedIn and
I ask her to do stuff all the time and
she's like I don't want to do that Avery
but I'm gonna do it and I'm gonna do it
scared and that's one of the phrases
I've really come to love is I'm gonna do
it scared and you know post on LinkedIn
scared comment on LinkedIn scared all
right it's okay to be scared but let me
ask you this what's the worst thing that
could happen
what's the worst per thing that could
possibly happen with you commenting and
posting on LinkedIn you say something
wrong someone thinks you're dumb
people aren't thinking about you
people aren't thinking about me I'm
thinking about me you're thinking about
you they're thinking about them all
right people are thinking about you way
less than you actually think they are so
don't be worried because it is not as
bad as you think it is so try it this
week try posting twice commenting every
day and growing your network and that is
my roadmap for landing your First Data
job the skills what are they Excel
Tableau SQL
build a project in each one of those
have an Excel project have a tableau
project have a SQL project put it on a
for portfolio and say hey come and see
world this is how awesome I am I have
learned the data skills necessary to
land my job and then you'll start to see
more traffic and then build your network
and then all of a sudden you're going to
be getting these opportunities where
jobs are actually applying to you
instead of you applying to jobs
so if you grow your network if you have
a portfolio and you have those three
skills that is enough to land your First
Data job ninety percent of the time
there's exceptions I'm not going to
pretend that this is the formula for
everyone there's definitely exceptions
but the majority of you guys that is the
formula and you have to perfect those
three things and if I have to perfect
them I'm going to choose
the network the portfolio and then the
skills don't take another Excel class
don't take another SQL class unless the
market says oh you're not good enough at
Excel unless someone says those words or
they reject you for not having enough
Tech experience or something like that
don't reject yourself first all right so
that is my roadmap for you guys if you
want more of all this roadmap and
actually like we're gonna go in an hour
session instead of just like this 15
minute session that we did click the
link in the description down below I do
a free webinar where I talk you through
the SBN method in detail give a lot more
examples success stories stuff like that
it's awesome go ahead and click that
down and I'll give you more advice until
then guys I hope that you're gonna
follow this roadmap and land your First
Data job in 2023 I am hoping for you
guys I am praying for you guys I am team
you in this journey and if there's
something I can do to help you on this
please let me know if you guys enjoyed
this episode will you guys please just
really quickly it'll take you about 30
seconds go and leave a rating and review
it really helps the podcast grow and it
makes me feel good to read them that you
guys are actually enjoying this so I'd
really appreciate it and I'll talk to
you guys next week have a good

Title: Tripling Your Income in 18 Months with Data Analytics w/ Kedeisha Bryan

Description: This is the story of how a warehouse worker pivoted into a senior data engineer in just 18 months, while tripling her salary. 

In this episode of The Data Career Podcast, Avery Smith sits down with Kedeisha Bryan on how she landed a data job and tripled her income in only 18 months.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


    
Kedeisha‚Äôs Links:
Connect on LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/kedeishabryan/
Join Data in Motion: https://discord.com/invite/x56vNby6

Timestamps
9:19 - Why you need a sponsor in your career journey
11:21 - Easy hack for networking
27:02 - Stop sending job applications? Network instead
30:16 - The data career journey is a long game



Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I interview khadisha Bryan who
is the creator of data in motion a
senior data engineer at Booze Allen
Hamilton and used to be a data science
intern at humu about everything about
breaking into data analytics she's one
of the former students of the data
analytics accelerator to talk a little
bit about that how I helped her in her
journey but also how she really helped
herself and her journey by having killer
networking skills doing coffee chats
sending cold messages and having a great
portfolio I think you guys are gonna
love this episode this is the data
career podcast welcome to the data
career podcast the podcast that helps
aspiring data professionals land their
next data job here's your host Avery
Smith
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast everyone I am here
today with an awesome guest kadisha
Brian if you guys don't know kadisha
she's awesome we'll have her LinkedIn
profile in the description down below
she's currently a senior data engineer
working at Booze Allen Hamilton she was
a production supervisor in the United
States Navy so she is a veteran and I
love veterans so thank you for your
service kadisha she upskilled herself
while working in a warehouse which is
really awesome she was a data science
intern at humu and one of the coolest
things she's done is tripled her income
in less than 18 months kadisha welcome
to the data career podcast
thank you so much Avery glad to be here
I'm stoked to have you here because
we've been friends
for I don't even know exactly like a
year and a half
yeah I actually joined dcj like October
21 so yeah about a year and a half then
that that's awesome and khadisha's gone
and gone on to do awesome things in her
career like I said she's currently a
senior data engineer with Booz Allen
Hamilton runs this data in motion which
is an awesome data Community she's data
science intern at humu
and just a really good wealth of you
know transitioning into the data world
because like I said you know she has
these cool roles right now but she
wasn't always in the data world she was
in the Navy for a little bit so you want
to tell us a little bit about what you
did in the Navy and I guess how you got
to where you're at today so in the Navy
I started off as a calibration
technician so very Hands-On technical uh
then I moved up into production
supervisor and then right before or
after I left in 2020 I went back into
school and I was expecting to walk into
a hundred thousand dollar jobs and that
just did not happen so I just went back
into went back into school and started
delivering pizzas for dominoes I was
doing that for about a few months then
started delivering packages for Amazon
and then did that for a few months and
started working at the warehouse yeah
did Amazon Warehouse or just what type
of Warehouse oh it was a alcohol
distributor so very heavy just imagine
big wine cases alcohol cases so doing
that for 10 12 hours a day that sounds
exhausting
it was exhausting I was in great shape I
appreciated that but otherwise it was
terrible yeah I can imagine it's
actually funny we were going to have
another one of our one another one of
the dcj students on his name is Andrew
Lujan and he recently just landed his
first data job as a data analyst and he
was I guess kind of on the delivery side
of the alcohol distribution but he was
lifting heavy stuff and taking them to I
don't know different distilleries or
wineries or bars or whatever and anyway
it's kind of funny you guys have that
similar background okay but obviously
you're a data engineer now so probably
less have I guess still heavy lifting
but just heavy lifting in the data not
heavy lifting in the physical labor is
that right correct definitely mentally
it's like heavy mental lifting I would
say so yeah deadlifts for mental stuff
yeah okay now walk us through that
Journey a little bit how did you get
from you know delivering pizza at
Domino's to Landing a senior data
engineering position Okay so I first
learned about the data engineering space
I would say maybe like spring 21 when I
was discussing it with a professor
because I was like trying to figure out
what are some good job opportunities for
me
and she mentioned data analytics so I
researched it went on Google I think my
first month was trying to decipher the
difference between a data scientist and
data analyst then I settled on analysts
I self-studied for summer of 21 pretty
much SQL Tableau some power bi create a
decent portfolio and then in the midst
of while I was doing that I was also
working at the warehouse the 10 to 12
hours a day
and the thing about that warehouse gig
it was like a bait and switch and I
eventually just quit with no backup plan
and I started studying data for about
six hours a day six days a week just
because I loved it so much it was just
really cool to finally find something
where I can learn and get better at
something you know on my own without
having to like you know in school or pay
tuition or things like that
so it's just a really cool field to get
into and I knew internships were
starting to were going to pop up late or
early August so I Was preparing for that
I applied I got my resume beefed up
pretty much and I got my first gig at
Cox Communications
I did that and while doing that also
found dcj and started doing a lot more
upskilling in my free time and started
doing a lot of networking also in 2022
so last year and so during that time you
actually hit me up at some point and
said if I saw some like job that Mark
Freeman posted in the dcj Discord and
then you actually ended up getting both
of us to talk and basically I submitted
my information and I applied to it I got
the job and I was able to start in I'd
say the fall of last year and so while I
was doing that I was also networking
like ridiculously the entire time so I
was having coffee chats at least twice a
week sometimes way more than that I my
thing was I wanted to learn from people
who were way more advanced than me I
want to learn from people who were steps
ahead than me and know exactly what they
got there and what I need to do to get
and so with that type of approach
I never really approached them with the
idea of I'm hoping to get a job from
them but you know eventually they would
think about me for you know roles or
opportunities and it was just insane to
me so it was really a crazy networking
crazy upskilling sometime last year
someone posted about something about
Booz Allen and my veterans a data
science group
and Veterans data science and machine
learning were a group and I applied for
it and I got the gig so I was it's crazy
like my past two jobs it spurned out of
a Discord
run out of a discourse for a lot of
networking it's insane so that's how I
got this job so that's like a kind of a
in a nutshell how I got here I love it
thank you thank you for that summary
that was really great there's a lot of
stuff that I want to dive a little bit
deeper into and I'm going to start
sometimes I build up when I do these
podcasts like we build up to kind of the
advice at the end but I kind of want to
reverse that with you so you did two
coffee chats a week tell us like do you
think that was worth it
oh absolutely yeah absolutely worth it
honestly I think a lot of people like
they'll focus on you know followers or
things like that when posting on
LinkedIn but oh it's like the it's the
networking or the folks that you're
talking to behind the scenes that's
really where your real network is built
so it was exhausting at times there were
times where I kind of overbooked myself
but I've Advanced way faster and much
more quicker than how do I just tried to
be to myself and not Network them yeah I
think that work is really key I mean
that's one of the things I really
believe in and one of the things why I
think data career jumpstart is a little
bit different you know and the ESPN
method skills portfolio Network you have
to have all three because the networking
is what ends up Landing you both your
jobs kind of at the end of the day right
and it's like you can spend all this
time applying to jobs you could spend
all this time filling out all these
applications perfecting your resume all
that stuff but if you don't have that
that could lead you nowhere a lot of
times the network is actually what leads
you to the promised land at the end of
the day I'm reading a message that I
sent to you on March 29th 2022 with I
guess your kind of former boss and I
basically introduced you to mark because
you were doing awesome things for me and
you're doing awesome things for your
fellow students in my program and my
community and so I introduce you to Mark
and then you ended up Landing that job
at humu and anyways it's just crazy to
me like
you you could have had the world's best
resume but if you weren't networking
people don't really know or don't really
care right absolutely I tell people a
big thing about networking is that
there's a like I saw my favorite Ted
Talk it's about something about the
differences between a sponsor a coach
and a mentor and
sponsors are folks that in rooms that
you're not in they and opportunities are
being brought up these are people who
speak your name right so you want folks
like that on your side and you're not
going to get that if you're not
networking and building those
relationships
um so like I said like that stuff was
easy I didn't really have to I mean I
skipped the recruiter you know it's got
a lot of steps doing that and if you put
yourself out there just like you if I
even if I was in your cohort and you
know I wasn't really putting myself out
there you wouldn't have thought of me
for that opportunity because I think one
thing that people don't realize like
you're not going to put up anyone for
you know referring things or referring
jobs you're going to put up you know
people that you think would actually do
a good job
you know an interview or would be good
for the job so yeah you really want
those sponsors in your life who speak
who speak your name in rooms that you're
not in and opportunities are brought up
yeah it's a good point because even if
you have the network you have to have
some substance behind it because
especially with that job opening that
was my friend Mark right and I want to
have a good relationship with Mark I
don't want him I don't want to waste his
time I don't want to send him someone
that's going to be causing trouble or
just be a waste of an interview right so
you're definitely right that like I had
a bunch of people in my program and you
were the person I chose for that one
because I was like I trust khadisha is
ready for this I think she would do a
good job I think she'd make me look good
she'd make the program look good so
you're definitely right it's about
networking and you have to have
substance behind it as well now going in
Back to the coffee chats one thing that
I think a lot of my students inside of
the data analytics accelerator program
are nervous about is it kind of seems
like coffee chats can sometimes be
one-sided like you're just asking them
to help you so can you tell us a little
bit about your mindset that you went
into these coffee chats and like what
type of like thing like how would you
even ask to do a coffee chat yeah that's
a good one so one thing that I've
learned is that people are more than
willing to help you but you do have to
present it in a good way so I would try
to find some sort of like common ground
that you have between that person so
like for example when I was at Cox
Communications it was I would first
reach out to people at the company and
say hey I work here and I'd like to
speak to you you know a general thing
like that if I would also go to like my
alma mater so folks that went to
Kennesaw State I can you know you can
filter it down and find people who work
maybe like a data scientist or things
like that and say hey I went to your
alma mater or I went to Kennesaw State
just like you I like to talk to you this
is a field that I'm trying to get into
try to find those Common Grounds and you
realize people do want to help you but
if you approach it in a sort of way that
you're not really interested in that
person you're just interested in them
trying to get you a job I feel like it's
not going to work but if you come across
in a way where you're really interested
in who they are what they did to get to
where they're at and try to find a
common ground between that person you're
going to get a lot of yeses in my
opinion it's hard it's hard for people
to not say to say no to that yeah I feel
like most the time the answer is yes or
and ignore or like uh just like a no
reply so really that's all you have to
lose is you if you ask for a coffee chat
you're either going to get a yes or
you're going to get an ignore and the
ignores don't really matter and the yes
can be you know almost life-changing at
the end of the day and I think you're
right that people are more willing to
help than you think especially if you
have that you know if you went to the
same school if you are from the same
Hometown there's I don't know like our
tribal instincts kick back in and we're
like yes this person belongs to the same
group that I belong to I want to help
them the most I can especially if you
put it in a way that it's like you're
not even asking for anything you just
want to hang out but then what happens
is like you said earlier you're on their
mind of when a job opening pops up oh my
gosh I talked to kadisha a couple weeks
ago she'd be a great candidate for this
role and you're really the name of the
game of that is just being top of mind
when opportunities pop up oh yeah I
remember this person they'd be a good
fit absolutely and I don't think people
really think about it that way or if
they're scared about networking but
honestly that's way better than trying
to apply to 50 500 plus job applications
because the thing is we want to put the
ownership in your court you want to put
the power in your court and if you just
rely on
you know applying to random jobs or just
LinkedIn or indeed or whatever job
platform site honestly like the odds are
not really in your favor and you know
the power is not on your side and you're
really leaving your success up to just
complete chance so why not put the ball
into your court and put the power on
your side and actually just really get
over your anxieties and meet people it's
really not that bad honestly
and I'm an introvert yeah exactly it's
almost easier than applying for all
those jobs in the black hole you know
one thing I was mentioning was I've been
doing this webinar where I'm talking
about the ESPN method and for the
networking section I have this poll that
I screenshotted from my friend Jordan
Nelson and he did two polls in a row in
a day and the first one was you know how
do you try to get a job and eighty
percent of people said that they go to
portals and they apply and the next day
he said how did you get your last job
and 66 percent of people said it was
either through a recruiter or through
Earth referral and that the whole point
is like everyone's spending eighty
percent of their time in the job portals
but that leads to only a third of the
actual jobs the majority of the jobs
two-thirds of the jobs are from
recruiting and from the referrals and so
it's like you should probably put your
eggs in that basket at least you know
instead of going 80 20 on the job portal
may get 50 50. you know apply to a job
send a cold message apply to a job send
the cold message and just test it
yourself this isn't you know kadish and
I aren't saying you know buy our snake
oil here it's you can go do this you
know in the next two weeks go try apply
to a job and a portal and then try cold
messaging someone do that I don't know a
couple times and see what has better
results because I don't at least for me
in kadusha it's been it's not been the
job portals it's been the the network
part of it okay that's really cool now
tell us a little bit more so you're
doing these coffee chats was there one
that like that like you found
particularly that was really impactful
or they were all were they all kind of
useful in their own little way oh wow
I'm gonna say the latter to be honest
with you I can't pinpoint one right now
that was depending on where I was at the
time would dictate the type of questions
I was asking you know so I remember this
time a year ago I was asking you know I
was thinking about oh what type of jobs
would I like to do
and I was talking to like analytics
Engineers data scientists product
managers and ask them all these types of
questions in terms of hey what do you do
on the job and what are maybe top skills
that I should focus on and learn to get
to where you're at then later on it was
going on more so of you know maybe
how to like advance in the field and
stuff like that so honestly every single
one of them were impactful at the time
can't think of one that was better than
the other okay I like that tell us like
what's your opinion on skills you're one
of the you know the people who have
touched their hands on many skills in
the data field like Technologies tools I
guess is what I'm talking about what
have you found that you actually use on
a day-to-day basis and what have you
found that you don't actually use that
maybe people are like you have to learn
this and then you never even oh wow I
mean I don't really use Excel that much
I haven't really used Excel that much
but I'm not the type that says you
shouldn't use Excel I just feel like in
my jobs I never really had to use it
what did you use at Cox
mostly SQL python some Excel mostly
Tableau just like a little bit of XO but
you know I've never really had to use
any of the formulas and things like that
I kind of consider that Cox like Co-op
or internship you did your First Data
job and then the humu one your second
Jada job and then the senior data
engineer kind of your third so it makes
sense especially in the second and third
that you're probably not using Excel as
much but that's kind of good to know in
your first one you were using Tableau
SQL a little bit of python right
actually I learned python in my first
job oh you did so it was like an
important part of it then I learned on
the job though I didn't know it before I
got there you were getting paid to Learn
Python is that what you mean absolutely
absolutely I did yeah that's what I've
been trying to tell people because I
mean I don't know about you I love
python it's my favorite tool but it is
not an easy tool to learn and I feel
like if you're learning it from scratch
before you're trying to land your First
Data job it's gonna take you a while and
it's not necessarily even necessary to
know python before that First Data job
so if you can be like khadisha and
figure out how to get paid to Learn
Python on the job
chef's kiss right there that's how we do
it okay and then as at humu I'm guessing
more python because that was a data
science internship yes most definitely
Python and SQL it was like uh I was like
an analytics engineer type of gig what
type of job so mostly Python and SQL and
the thing is also I was it was assumed
that I was supposed to know SQL it was
assumed I was supposed to know Python
and I didn't really use the python and
see what I use at that job I haven't
really used it that way at Cox so had I
not upskilled in my free time I was I
wouldn't have been qualified for the
position pretty much I think so it was
like different Sequel and different
python correct
yeah and that's something that's been
interesting about watching khadisha's
career is she has I mean you're I think
you're all you're well past your First
Data job I mean you have a senior title
now right
I do yeah yes so you're well past your
First Data job so I think perspectives
change as you go past your First Data
job and things get a little bit I mean
you grow as you get these jobs right
like you first did a job you're always
going to be better after you've spent a
couple months to a year there and then
you're always going to be learning new
things and now you're to the point where
you know you're not only a senior title
but data engineering is like a very
developing field and constantly you
can't even if you stop learning and data
engineering you're useless in months so
you've really gotten that work habit and
that skills of like actually like
learning on your own and putting in the
time right absolutely and I'm also
learning that within like data
engineering and like whether where's
data science was like different like sub
roles as well so like analytics
engineering or whatever it is but
there's like different areas of type of
focus so it's pretty cool to also see
that too but it's one of those things
that you don't you're not really gonna
get until you're like actually in or
actually getting a job and actually see
that so I think that's pretty cool yeah
okay let's talk about when you were
trying to land your first job or maybe
trying to land your second job did you
ever feel like giving up no absolutely
not really tell us more about that I
mean honestly I feel like
maybe it was the networking and honestly
talking to people and getting that like
feedback
if I was not networking then you're not
getting like any feedback let's say if I
was not networking and say I was just
like going through like a year of
applying and just getting constant
rejection that'd be pretty tough I can't
say I would have quit at that moment but
or at that point but that would have
been pretty tough but when you're
networking and you're constantly getting
like good feedback I mean technically I
secured the humu job several months
before it started so
I mean I just felt pretty uh fortunate
to be in positions where
even when I was looking for something it
didn't take that long for me to get
something but that's mainly because of
the networking so because of that I
would say overall I never wanted to quit
I will say though at some points when it
came down to like maybe
like a data scientist job at some points
I felt like wow maybe the same for me
maybe I should go to the other side
because there's just so much to learn
and so much to learn and sometimes these
job descriptions for data scientists job
specifically can look pretty pretty
overwhelming and intimidating totally
that makes sense yeah I think you
brought up a good point that it's you
know finding a data job is hard but if
you have that Network it makes it a lot
easier and you might be thinking well I
don't have the network it's I didn't
plant my tree the best time to plant
your tree or grow your network was you
know a year ago but the next best time
is today right so you might have had
that advantage over some other people
that you know didn't have as strong as a
network that you did or maybe were
scared to do it so that's a really good
Insight that the network and the people
around you made that whole journey
easier for you than it might have other
been might have been otherwise I think
that's impactful I think people should
really pay attention to that because it
I mean everything I mean imagine
especially in today's day and age when
we're mostly you know doing these job
applications online imagine learn
learning on your own
I mean there's awesome resources to
learn online both paid and free but once
again you're by yourself then you're
supplying to job after job by yourself
and getting rejected by yourself that
probably wouldn't feel pretty good but
you didn't happen to have that
experience no I did not that's good that
was from Network mostly yeah that's
awesome and let's talk about quickly
because when you joined my program you
had joined some other programs
previously that you were not as big of a
fan of we'll let them name remain
nameless but tell me what you liked
about my program as opposed to other
things that you had done previously so I
would say most courses like it's not
really much interaction with the person
who made it and dcj was a first course
like I joined when you were doing the
hackathon as well and so it was the
first course I joined where wow there's
a lot of interaction with the person who
created the course
wow this is like you you were like a
legit like data mentor to like all of us
in the community you know we're able to
like ask you questions you're providing
right feedback the projects that you had
set up was really cool the main thing
was like the interaction with you and
like the back and forth that's not
really you don't really find that in
most courses it's usually hey here's
like a you know five track course or a
set of courses and a community that's
not really that you know helpful so I
always say the interaction and the real
Community aspect is what made the big
difference I'm so glad to hear that
because that's one of the things I try
to be like more active like for instance
I just taught I don't even know if you
knew this but I just taught at MIT I
taught data engineering for a year and a
third and no one ever gets to talk to
the professors not even me like the
professors who to who who teach
everything with the pre-recorded videos
they're just like
these make-believe people basically I
mean they're real but like you don't
ever really get to think that they're
real and that's one thing I love about
dcj is like getting to be to getting to
do the Hands-On stuff but then also I
think the community and I need you to
come visit because now we have a way
more kicking Community than we used to
have but I love it because it's like
you can climb a mountain by yourself but
it's like scary and dark and not as fun
or you can do with friends and it's
always better to do with friends and
that's one of the things I think you've
always done really well is you've just
surrounded by yourself around with
people who care about you who care about
the same stuff as you and who are on the
same path as you and I think that's one
of the reasons why you're like did I
ever get discouraged not really I was
always I was doing all right exactly
when you were working with other folks
or like your cheerleaders I mean it's
like you got your own like personal
Advisory Board there too so you're not
by yourself any otherwise I don't know
about anyone else but there's no one
like my family they don't understand
what I'm doing I can't talk to them
about this stuff so you know like this
is really all I have in terms of you
know data stuff so I mean I always try
to get people join some sort at least
one private Community because that's
you're not gonna you're not gonna regret
that honestly yeah can be hard because
it's you can learn everything for free
you can like like I'm never going to say
that you like can't learn everything for
free but the point is a lot of it is
motivation mental and also talking to
someone to like give you advice on your
exact path because that's worth so much
I loved what you said earlier that you
were focused on finding the people that
can help you you know that are steps
ahead of you that can show you the path
and I'm actually reading this book right
now it's really good it's called who not
how it's a really interesting book
because if you have a problem in life
you know a lot of us are tempted like
the school system has basically taught
us that we need to answer it with a how
like how do I fix this problem but the
way that this book presents it is it's
actually you'll get you'll solve your
problem faster if instead of asking how
you ask who who can help me solve this
problem because the who's are always
easier than the house and it saves you
time and like you said like you had this
problem of trying to land like a data
science job right and it's not like you
had to know you had to know your stuff
like you had to know something but it's
not your breakthrough was in the amount
of python you knew or how many like
lines of code you had written it was in
your network right it was in you know
finding the right people talking to them
getting the right opportunity for
yourself it was really at the end of the
day when the problem was how do I or not
how I need a data science job the answer
wasn't how it was who and I think that's
a mindset that I'm trying to get out of
myself even with everything I'm doing in
my life is how do I solve problems with
a who and not a how does that make sense
or did that make no that made a lot of
sense I'm mean because like me for me
right now if I if something happened and
I was out of a job tomorrow my first
instinct is to reach out to a set of
people in my network and say hey I'm
looking for something rather than what
majority of people would do is just
start flooding a bunch of like job
applications so yeah it's who can help
you and I've learned that personally in
the past like several months and leaning
on other folks's expertise and being
first being knowing and being okay with
not knowing everything
and because that has to you have to kick
your ego out the door about number one
and just it's okay to ask for help and
it's okay to rely on other folks
expertise because everyone likes to help
Everyone likes to help you yeah for sure
you reminded me of a post I said on
LinkedIn yesterday that was basically
the same thing that basically what you
become a master of data learning when
you can say the phrase I'll never know
everything about data and that's okay
and once once you hit that point you're
you can become a senior data engineer
which by the way I mean if you go look
at conditions page kadisha have you been
a data engineer before not like the
title I would say like at whom it was
like a analytics engineering I would say
which which is so cool because
it's not about titles at the end of the
day right it's about you know your
personality have you networked the right
people do you know the stuff that's the
other cool thing about this awesome data
world is it's like you said you don't
have to pay a million dollars or you
don't have to be certain like my wife's
a nurse she has to be certified to keep
her license every year like you don't
have to do that you have to know the
right people get the right skills you
know get your foot in the door and then
you can keep learning on the job because
I'm assuming you're learning every day
about data engineering pretty much yeah
pretty much I know I would be and I was
when I was teaching at MIT I was like I
didn't know any of this stuff so anyways
I just think this is awesome because I
think you've given everyone a really
good example of you know how we can go
from delivering Domino's Pizza to a
senior data engineer I mean how many
that was 18 months or how long was that
two years about
so it was summer 21. was it summer yeah
so yeah like a year and a half that is
crazy you guys but Khadija did it you
could do it too it's all about you know
having the base layer of skills having a
portfolio and then really leaning on the
network and the who's in your life that
can take you to the next stage and I
think you did she just did a really good
example I'm stoked for you and your new
job I'm stoked for your community in
data in motion and how that's going I
just think you're an awesome example and
I hope to everyone listening you know
you guys can you guys can listen to
kadisha's story and be like if kadisha
do it did it from a warehouse to you
know senior data engineer I can do it
too kadisha I'm super proud of you and
just I'm thank you so much for being on
the podcast it's awesome hearing your
story
thank you Avery thanks thanks for
inviting me also I hope you know this
too you're like one of the goats of like
data mentorship I think you're the goat
in my opinion hey I appreciate that that
means a lot to me and I appreciate I
like I said I'm just super stoked any
parting words of advice that you'd give
to any of the people listening if they
want to you know break into the data
field I would say this stuff is the long
game so I know a lot of people may think
with networking probably don't want to
do it because it's they don't get like
immediate results
but this is a long game if you just if
you break into the field six months from
now understand that there's still a lot
more learning to do you may want to get
another opportunity a year later on and
who are you going to rely on so after
you get your first job please don't get
off of LinkedIn always Network always
build your network always continue to
talk to people always continue to build
relationships because this is a long
game and honestly networking is going to
be
I put networking above upskilling and
everything else because that's going to
that's going to pay you dividends far
beyond anything else
I'm with you and you I could have said
it better myself I call it the SBN
method skills portfolio network but
really I wish I could name it The NPS
method but I don't think it sounds as
good because I think the network is
really important as well so I love that
and I also love that you said play the
long game and here you are tripling your
salary in 18 months it's it that's not a
long game to a lot of people in my mind
but you're right you know it might take
you six months to get that first step
but if you play the long game at the
beginning it's a shortcut to the rest of
your career but anyways I think that was
really well said and we'll end it right
there thanks kadisha for being on and I
can't wait to see what your future holds
all right thanks Avery I hope you
enjoyed that episode and if you did I'm
gonna have an awesome free masterclass
that I know you're going to love we're
going to talk about a lot of things this
episode talked about you can get it
absolutely for free at
datedcarejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: How He Landed a Data Analyst Job in 90 Days (w/ Stephen Tran)

Description: Stephen shared his incredible journey from tech support to a successful data analyst in only 3 months! Learn the key skills & strategies that helped him make the transition.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



Timestamps:

10:16 Your personalized project is critical to landing a data job
11:23 You're missing out if you don't use the filter feature
14:17 Get your mentor and fix your resume!
17:29 It's hard to help you if you don't have a portfolio
23:33 Don't be afraid of the job ads requirement
36:15 Luck favors those who are prepared

Stephen‚Äôs Links: 

Connect on Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/stephentran96/



Video Transcript:
welcome back to the data career podcast
I'm super excited for today's episode
I'm doing an interview with one of our
dcj data career jumpstart members Steven
Tran and I'm super excited to have him
here and tell us about his stories
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith so Steven
welcome to the podcast thank you Avery I
love that you invited me on the podcast
because I don't know if you know this
I've listened to every single episode of
your podcast
really yeah it's actually helped me a
lot making my LinkedIn post so we'll
talk about that awesome well now you I
guess this is one of the episodes you
won't listen to you don't have to listen
to this one I guess you can just you can
just be in it you can just talk about it
so super excited to have you so let's
start with we're gonna start with the
big picture Okay so for those of you who
don't know which is probably a lot of
you guys Steven was working what was
your title before your current title
it was technical support analyst okay
and what type of company was that for it
was for a mortgage company called Ellie
May and they were acquired by Ice
mortgage technology so that's what
they're known as now okay so you were
kind of working in this like mortgage
company doing a little bit of of I.T
work is that right or yeah I just call
it a glorify tech support job okay sweet
so like was that like making sure people
like had PowerPoint working correctly or
like what was like a daily task
yeah so it was a little bit more than
that because what I was doing I was
giving like API support so we have our
program called Encompass where people
can or mortgage loan officers can go
through and manage their loans and stuff
but we also we allow them to create
their own code so I would help debug
that code for them basically so I would
have tickets and whatnot that I have to
go through and follow up and you know
and all that stuff like that but yeah
basically a tech support role okay so
from a tech support role to now I think
your title is I'm gonna read this senior
associate in analytics right yep that's
correct okay at densu which is like a
like a big media marketing company right
that's right okay so basically you
transformed your career from this tech
support role into this you know senior
associate analytics role in like less
than six months correct absolutely yep
that's right okay so to give the people
a timeline you are at this non-data job
and then got this awesome data job and
just a couple months what were the
timelines on that like when did you
start your data so
in data Journey overall I finished my
degree in Business Administration back
in December so I was looking into jobs
of data or like how I can gain the skill
set in November it's been a very recent
pivot because I was kind of like oh no
I'm going to graduate soon what am I
going to do you know I'm working this
this dead-end tech support job I don't
want to do this forever I want to be a
data analyst what is it going to take to
become one okay so I didn't realize that
so this is November of 2021 you're going
to graduate from your degree which was
in Business Administration in December
and and that's when I guess you spoke or
to a mutual friend of ours I guess your
cousin is that right that's right okay
Dom shout out Dom and Dom introduced you
to me and in my program so I think you
joined data career jumpstart the big
course the project camp in November
correct that's correct and then when did
you land your job with Denson so my
official start date was February 28th
but they extended the offer to me about
a month beforehand so January like the
end of January okay so so end of January
early February so basically we're
looking at November December January
January three months yep three months
from from like did you like how much
data experience did you have so it I had
python classes because I also did
computer science before I transitioned
and I also had a single SQL course that
I took which I did not take seriously so
I didn't carry a lot so not a whole
bunch I would say okay but some so
that's that's what you're referring to
but back in college you originally were
studying computer science and then
switched to business right yep so not
like a ton definitely no real world
experience you know maybe some college
classes and you're in a tech support
role and it sounded like there were some
at least looking at code involved in
that so not like the furthest away but
also not the closest right yes exactly
okay so basically just just to give
people an overview in three months you
end from tech support role to this new
job in analytics and I guess tell people
a little bit about your current job like
are you in the office or no nope it's
completely remote I completely remote
and like do do you like what you do more
than you did previously
oh absolutely 100 percent
it's it's so much fun I'm learning so
much every day I mean it's stressful
with all the projects that are going on
but it's good stress you know it's
something that I can work on and learn
more of
it okay and like so okay now you're
working remotely I guess you're still in
California right yes that's right okay
so you got to stay or live where you
want to live the people the the company
density is pretty International where do
they have offices I don't even know they
have a lot of offices on the East Coast
I one of their main offices is in New
York so a lot of my team is in New York
do you have to like wake up early for
calls then or no actually they've been
pretty nice even though I'm the only
West Coast person they've been trying to
schedule all our meetings like later on
in the day just for me so it'll be in
the afternoon for them but like in the
morning for me which I I don't mind at
all so they've been really nice about
that
that's awesome okay so you get to be
where you're at you're a West Coast guy
you're working from home what what about
financials like like are you if I mean
go into as much detail as you want but
like do you feel like you're better
financially at this place than you were
at the other place yes 100 in a better
place I wasn't struggling before but I
definitely not struggling now it was
about a 15K increase which is I'm super
psyched about because this is something
that you know I like living on my own I
want to keep living on my own so I've
definitely am able to do that still
okay so wow so basically you like
essentially in three months you gave
yourself a fifteen thousand dollar raise
basically yeah I would say that
and and the cool part I think about
analytics and data in general is it's
like you're not it's not dead end like
you can keep progressing on and on for a
long time so it's like you know it's 15
000 you know at the jump and then and
then you know maybe five years down the
line it's another you know 20 or
something like that who knows but it's
like you can keep progressing right and
I think that's one of the coolest Parts
yes that was one of the biggest things
for me because one of the things that I
asked for when I was interviewing was
that do you have a way for me to become
a data scientist because that was a
really big thing for me because
progression is huge for me because I
need that motivation I need to be able
to progress upwards and you know it's
not just from a money standpoint it's
from I just want to build myself you
know I just finished college and it's
still fresh for me I want to get into
the workforce and I want to build my
reputation okay so let's now now that
people understand you know your journey
so from tech support graduating college
and business maybe taking one one or two
programming classes to within three
months Landing this job at a pretty big
International you know marketing company
getting that 15 000 raise being able to
work you know where you want let's talk
about kind of the the how how you got
there and what you thought was was
important so you started by joining data
career jumpstart and you know took some
of the lessons there do you feel like
you were learning quickly like what what
was the first thing they were like oh my
gosh I'm getting this I like this like
what was the first time were you like
this totally is something I wanted yeah
so definitely the biggest thing that I
love about dcj and this is one thing
that I talk to a lot of people about is
I like the project approach rather than
the here's a homework assignment it's
due next week kind of approach and also
the the shorter videos The Bite Bite
Bite 10 to 20 minute videos I don't know
about you but I feel like I just snore
an hour two hour long lecture like I
don't retain anything you know a lot of
these things they are Hands-On you can
follow along but I just get so bored I'm
gonna have to pause it here when I come
back I'm gonna forget where I was so I
love the little bite-sized videos that
you have and that's just one thing that
was able to keep me to do like oh maybe
I'll do two videos today or three videos
the next day so I can just do something
every day you know it keeps it fresh
yeah I think that's something I've
really tried to do with with most of my
courses and trainings is like projects
projects projects projects projects
projects and I remember I think you
latched on to that pretty quickly I
remember you know one of the hobbies
that you have outside of data right but
outside of work is is weightlifting
right you want to tell the people a
little bit about what you do
yeah so I'm a competitive powerlifter
which means I try to lift as heavy as I
possibly can in the squat bench and
deadlift category so that's a little fun
thing that I do outside of work outside
of my nine to five outside of my
studying so I you can typically find me
at the gym maybe two to three hours a
day okay but don't don't be humble tell
the people how you did in the last
competition yeah so I ended up getting a
gold medal first place in my last
competition so that was really fun and
that's really cool come on give us the
details so squat my heaviest lift was
457 pounds let's see bench was 270
pounds and the deadlift was
500.2 pounds sheesh that is crazy yeah I
don't know if I've done that that much
weight like in all of my years combined
of going to the gym so anyways you you
love weightlifting you went through a
pretty big fitness journey in your life
too right yes yes yeah and I remember
you made a project about it if I'm not
mistaken about you know kind of your
weight loss Journey your your weight
increase and like being able to lift and
for me that was when I was like all
right I see big things coming from
Stephen I was like this when you're able
to take something in your life that you
enjoy and apply and tie it into Data I'm
like okay that person's gonna succeed
mm-hmm absolutely that's one thing that
I talked to a lot of people a lot of
people that have been reaching out to me
through Linkedin is just don't just do
these projects that people are telling
you to do learn those skills and apply
them to things that you're passionate
about because I had so much fun making
that dashboard like I I don't know about
you but like if someone told me I had
fun doing dashboards I I would be like
you're just a nerd dude I don't want to
hear that but I had so much fun doing
that project because it's personal to me
it's something that I care about and I
just wanted it was my baby you know I
wanted to make it as best as I could and
people loved that dashboard especially
during interviews yeah so okay so you're
in dcj we're doing projects so we start
off with the screen time project doing a
lot of data visualization then then we
have a project about Fitness as well so
we dive into Python and those are kind
of the two the two things that probably
you had done before applying to jobs is
that correct that's correct yes so it
took you about
two months to do those more or less is
that right more or less yeah about two
months okay and and I guess another
aspect of data crew jumpstart is it's
not only technical skills but it's also
you know personal skills and soft skills
and networking skills so whole section
on LinkedIn whole section on finding
jobs when you were applying to jobs what
was your strategy and then what ended up
working so when I was applying to jobs a
lot of it was just going on LinkedIn
looking for data analysts whether I was
I was filtering by remote because my
last job was remote also and I was like
I don't want to go back to office
anymore I can just leave and go for a
walk whenever I want to so I made sure
remote was one of those and then I also
did easy apply I know it's not like the
best way to go through jobs but for me I
needed to do job applications as easy as
possible because it's really draining to
do job applications especially if you
have to email like three different cover
letters or whatnot so easy apply was
really good for me because I can
literally just lay in bed watch Netflix
and just apply apply apply
okay so I I would get through like 50 or
so applications a night you know I'll
just chilling applying that way and yeah
did you have any luck with the easy
applies I'll be honest not really I had
one company get back to me but that's
because I had experience in the mortgage
company so that one company got back to
me and I did interview with them as well
okay so a couple things a couple things
that I think you said one is like you're
applying to like data analyst positions
correct too yes that's correct okay so
one thing I like that Stephen just just
mentioned he doesn't have he's never
been a data analyst he doesn't have
analytics experience it's never been a
data scientist but he's applying for
these entry level you know data analyst
jobs but the where he had success I
think is really important here was when
he applied to a mortgage company and
some people are like oh I don't have any
experience being a data analyst and you
know what that might be true that might
not be on your resume you might not have
actually crunched that much numbers but
you definitely have some sort of
experience whether it's in teaching or
whether it's in mortgage or something
like that I think it's important to
really marry those at the beginning
especially when you're trying to get
interviews because like there's data in
every industry around the world right if
you've been you know it's if you've been
an athlete there's there's Sports
analytics jobs if you've been in
business there's business analyst jobs
like I think Stephen did a really good
point there of like leaning in on his
you know background and I think that
made him more attractive to to employers
and recruiters and stuff like that and
also a lot of perseverance right there
you know because because I'm sure you
got a lot of projections and and didn't
hear back from a lot of those right I'm
still getting those rejection emails and
I'm like I'm I'm good man I'm almost
three months into this job I don't I'm
good yeah yeah you're like sucks to suck
I already have a job thank you very much
so let's talk about that so how did you
find this job or how did they find you
and what was that process like
sure yeah so I actually saw through the
dcj Discord you know Ellie I absolutely
love Ellie she's one of my mentors and
Avery you're also one of my mentors I
want to make sure that that's clear like
you have an amazing community that
you've built here and the people that
are giving back even though they're not
we talked about this which is really
funny
and I wanted to message her on LinkedIn
but she did not allow
people so I had to get in mail and to
get in mail I had to get the what's it
called the LinkedIn premium yeah I
literally paid forty dollars to get
LinkedIn premium so I could send her a
message and say hey I'm interested about
this job can you look at my resume can
you talk to me let me know like would I
be a good fit what do I need to to learn
to be a good fit and we scheduled a
phone call and we talked about all that
and she actually helped me rebuild my
resume she helped me highlight some
words and stuff like that I would I
would go as far to say that she did
redid my whole resume for me she was
giving me tips at first and she was like
you know what just send me the send me
the word file I'll do it and she she
redid my whole resume for me so she's
absolutely amazing she's a senior
manager of analytics in dead cells as
well we don't work on the same team
unfortunately but we still talk from
time to time and she's an amazing asset
to have in this industry so I think I
think there's a lot of really
interesting things there because part
part of the reason I made data career
jumpstart and I haven't really I haven't
really talked about this since I
launched the course I've kind of I've
kind of forgotten about this but one of
the reasons I I launched it was because
you know I I broke into data science
like like seven years ago right and when
I was doing it I mean it was it was
still pretty popular I think but
definitely not as popular as it is now
and there definitely was not nearly as
many resources and I was super lonely I
was like I don't know if anyone knows
what I'm doing or like I don't know if
anyone else is on the same Journey as me
shout out to Ellie Ellie is totally
awesome very helpful to the community
and aspiring data professionals and you
connected with her but but hold on I
what I love here is that like there was
a there was something to get to overcome
you I couldn't figure out how to message
her that's okay because because you paid
the 40 bucks you got the LinkedIn
premium sent her an email what was that
cold message like like just like hey I
saw you posted in dcj Discord about a
job opening you know I've been I've been
an Avery's program and learning
something like that
it was 100 just like that it was just
yeah I've been working in dcj I've been
I've done with most of it can you look
at my resume what can I change or what
should I learn what should I focus on
basically
yeah and I love I love that also because
you had a portfolio that's that's
something that that okay so I have a lot
of DMs I get a lot of DMS every day
people people asking me for advice
people asking me for jobs I get a lot of
jobs
it's I think one out of a hundred DMS
that I've ever gotten have had a
portfolio attached to it and guess what
guess who I hired as the one person I've
ever really hired is the person who had
a portfolio having a portfolio just
proves that you like are for real and
like you can do the things that you say
you can here's the evidence right and I
know Ellie really liked that about you
that you had the portfolio that like you
had evidence she's a big fan of data
visualization you had awesome data
visualizations for instance from from
data career jumpstart and also just like
your fitness journey and stuff like that
as well had some had some pretty cool
data visualizations so I think that
played a big role in in you like
catching her attention and her being
willing to help you out was just like
you were for real you know that
portfolio made you for real yeah I was
gonna say portfolios are very
undervalued right now because I I also
get a lot of DMS especially now with all
my posts going viral or whatnot but a
lot of them they don't have portfolios
like they don't send me I ask them I
always say hey I can help you I know
you're looking somebody your resume send
me your portfolio a lot of them don't
have any portfolios in it and I just
keep telling people like how do these
companies know what you've been working
on sure you got the SQL skills you got
the python skills data visualization but
they need to see something it needs to
be tangible they need to be able to
picture you in their role before they
hire you
yeah that's one thing I try to promote
yeah for sure and let's let's go ahead
and talk about your LinkedIn so I'm
actually I'm actually going to go ahead
and I'm going to go to your LinkedIn
right now because I want I want to get
some live some live things all right so
I'm going to linkedin.com we'll have
Stevens LinkedIn in the show notes down
below I'm gonna go to your page let's
see I just lost it there we go and I
want to check something so currently
right now you have
3831 followers on LinkedIn okay yep I
want you to go back to November six
months ago okay not even half a year
really how many how many connections or
followers did you have on LinkedIn so I
had zero followers because I didn't
allow followers and connections it was
probably like 20 like 20 people so
basically you've grown your LinkedIn
like who knows how many times since
since you joined gcj basically yeah
and and more specifically so you went
from let's say let's say from 20 20 I
hate how LinkedIn has like connections
and followers it's kind of confusing I'm
just going to call them followers you
had like 20 connections and now you have
3831. now let's let's talk about
specifically how you gained those so
you've been posting I know a big part
about dcj is posting posting posting
posting posting and recently let's see a
couple days ago you had a post go super
viral five days ago it has
3194 reactions 95 comments 57 shares and
it's three sentences that's right so did
most of the followers come from that or
before that I would say most of them
came from that but I wanted to make sure
that I was still posting after that
because I feel like when you get that
exposure it only lasts so long so the
the biggest I wouldn't say stressor for
me was like oh what's the next post
gonna be it's definitely not going to be
as good but I need to show these new
followers you know the type of content
that I want to put out the kind of thing
things that I want to set so there was a
little bit of a time crunch for me yeah
okay so then the next one was three days
later
and it ended up getting
872 likes 82 comments and 25 shares yeah
yep that was the things you can do to
break into data analytics
okay and then the next one have
1437 reactions 85 comments and 163.
that's right okay so gone pretty viral
recently on on LinkedIn people are
asking you for advice what what advice
do you give people who who said they
want to go into analytics a lot of the
time I will ask what their background is
because a lot of people I you don't I
don't necessarily think that you need a
background in data analytics you can
literally get started today like look up
SQL look up some python learn some
dataviz
but a lot of the times they're they're
asking like what can I do or what can I
learn but some people are just straight
up asking me for a job and I'm like man
I'm just I'm just an associate like I
can't I can't give you a job but some
actually some people ask me like oh do
you have any projects I can help on
those people I value their comments a
little bit more because it's not
asking for a handout I I don't want to
sound vain but it just seems like it's
not mutually beneficial to either of us
you know what I mean so I I like those
messages that people are asking like
what what are you working on or what
what can I help you with things like
that
it's it's yeah I totally agree that
whenever whenever you're you know cold
messaging someone or or even like
talking to someone it's a the first
message should always be how can I
provide this person value in their life
how can I help this person because you
know obviously you know I have a
substantial LinkedIn following and when
I have posts that that go viral it's
like a mad zoo in there it's like very
it's very crazy and to be honest I don't
read like half of them probably at the
end of the day it's just it's just too
much but I try to find the ones that
like oh this is interesting or this
person's different or this person is
saying thank you like this person
doesn't want anything from me they're
just saying thank you and yeah maybe it
does seem vain but that's like human
nature like we we don't trust people
until they should prove their worthiness
you know and most the time people are
just asking for stuff and it's kind of
annoying because unfortunately I can't
spend you know we can't spend our whole
lives and our whole time helping people
we can help a few people but when it
gets to such a big big number it gets a
little bit different difficult because
we gotta put food on the table we gotta
pay the bills yeah so let me actually
let me let me read this this viral post
that you had so let me pull this up here
the one I really liked was things you
can do to break into data analytics
learn your hard skills in order of
importance IMO SQL Excel python
statistics data visualization Tableau
and power bi learn your soft skills
tailored resume online portfolio answers
to basic data analytic questions and
then don't forget to apply okay so talk
about one of those points that you find
that's like really valuable that other
people maybe maybe don't see the same
way that you do so
yeah this this post was definitely built
on my experience trying to get a job in
data analytics which I feel like my
individual experience
would that also applies to a lot of
other people which a lot of people have
been sending me a message like hey I
I've been in the exact place where you
are except I haven't gotten that job yet
but the biggest thing that the main
reason I wanted to make this this post
was the just because you don't satisfy
the job requirements but it was actually
a podcast that I listened to you and
someone said this I'm sorry I'm
forgetting the name of the person that
you talked to I think they were a data
freelancer a data freelancer they were
talking about that just make sure that
you apply like a lot of these job
requirements are just like they're not
even minimums I don't think they're like
the ideal candidate and that really
resonated with me because when I was
applying to jobs a lot of the time I
wasn't even looking at the job
requirements I was just applying because
like because in my head I'm just like if
they considered me then they fit me as
that profile
so if if I might as well shoot my shot
right for sure that was that was the
main thing I wanted to nail home it's
just like the these are like if you fit
50 60 of that profile do it why not what
do you have to lose yeah especially if
it's if it's only time I mean and time
obviously is valuable but at least it's
not money you know what I'm saying like
you can apply and definitely like I
think I think the requirements have to
be honest so I obviously I try to help
people find jobs and so one of my one of
my main jobs is to try to help keep my
students especially inside a data career
JumpStart find jobs that fit them well
and so I spend a lot of time talking to
CEOs a lot of times speaking to
recruiters and trying to match make the
process basically and so now people kind
of send me jobs and say hey I'm looking
for this do you have anyone like that
and recently I had a guy reach out to me
a CEO of a company I will not say which
but it's anyways it's a big business and
they but they've never actually had a
data analyst or data center so I guess
not that big I guess it's a mid-sized
company actually probably small compared
to everything in the world it probably
has like a hundred employees and she
wanted to hire data data analysts or a
data scientist and he's like I'm gonna
write the job description and let me
know what you think and he came back to
me and it was this it was a data analyst
role but like all the requirements were
data scientists like requirements and I
was like bro this is a data scientist
job and he's like well what's the
difference and so sometimes the people
you know writing the job hopefully this
isn't always the case like I hope I hope
this is an exception but like he didn't
even really know what he was talking
about and that's that's why he was
talking to me but sometimes sometimes
especially smaller companies they don't
know what they want or they're listing
like a hundred things and they don't
really need those things they need they
need two out of the hundred things so
you never know it can never hurt but but
one of the things I think is is most
valuable that you did was you're you're
leaning on your networking you're
leaning on the people you know you know
you're you're in the data career
jumpstart Discord you're talking to
dming people you know who who know me
like you're you're leaning on the
community around you and using the
network that ended up Landing you the
you know the awesome job and a lot of
the times I think you know applying
online does work but if you can figure
out how to like talk to a human instead
of having to go through the system I
would always choose talking the human 10
out of 10 times
absolutely absolutely I 100 agree every
job I've ever had and I've had six or
seven jobs or because I knew someone
that was working there already every
single job so networking is another
undervalued skill I I mean I don't want
to say it's undervalued but people don't
practice it the way that you should it
was making those connections and
building your skills based on those
connections is just yeah oh it's yeah
undervalued
I think especially on LinkedIn because
like I don't know about you but like I
do not necessarily enjoy networking
events like where well okay I take it
back but like for instance like socials
like where you like just have to like go
up someone introduce yourself I'm not
very good at that as an introvert and I
know maybe you guys don't believe me but
I'm super introverted and like I much
rather have like a topic so like for
instance if I posted on LinkedIn I would
love to comment on their post or if or
maybe they'll come on my post if I post
like I like having like a vehicle where
our conversation flows versus just like
meeting in person and and also like on
the internet I can tell I know exactly
who you are off of your LinkedIn profile
if we go to a real life like mixer I'm
just like judging your appearance to
like hopefully know what you do and like
I know that I went to the Silicon slopes
conference which is like a pretty big
tech tech conference in Utah and like I
was like how do I maximize my time I'm
gonna like meet some random people and
like you just walk into people and be
like hey what do you do and it's like oh
like I I make potato like machines and
it's like okay I'm sorry I'm not really
interested in that and I can't relate
versus on LinkedIn I can be like oh this
person you know works for a marketing
analytics company that's super
interesting let's start a conversation
there so I just feel like I feel like
LinkedIn is still underrated for the
networking aspect of it I don't know
yeah I think events like that they kind
of force this genuine connection when
you can't really Force something like
that especially at those events you're
you're expected to ask people what they
do that you're expected to be asked what
you do or as in LinkedIn you can choose
that you can choose to let anyone know
as much as you want to but also you know
you have your profile and all that stuff
but yeah it's just it just lacks that
genuineness
yeah and who knows maybe maybe maybe I
do like in-person events so maybe maybe
I I was just that too broad of an event
and maybe like like for instance I I
have enjoyed the data conferences that
I've gone to so maybe it was just too
broad but but anyways I like LinkedIn
because it could be really like I'm I'm
much better on one-on-one versus in
groups so big big fan of LinkedIn okay
so with that I'm just gonna re rehash
your story you're working in for this
mortgage company as a tech support
graduating college join dcj start
posting on LinkedIn you know you're by
the way your LinkedIn profile looks
really good I love love your cover photo
that's one of the things that we go over
in dcj and no one uses the cover photo
in a good way a lot of people don't
anyways so love it love your profile
picture great great headline on your
LinkedIn posting good things you're
using the featured section which is
another thing your first thing is your
portfolio next few things are cool
graphs and viral posts so you're nailing
you're nailing the LinkedIn thing land a
job through networking you know 15K
increase in in salary you know where
you're working remotely which is awesome
enjoying life have room to grow so
that's kind of this the Stephen story
that we want to shout from the root
rooftops and let everyone know that you
can you know you can go from from
I don't want to say nothing because you
are definitely something but but not
non-data jobs non-data jobs to a data
analyst role or associate data analytics
role in three months
right aren't you yeah absolutely crazy
Journey I've been on and still going on
so I I just want to give you all the
biggest props because there's people
inside of data career jumpstart who have
been in there you know like
how long is it I guess we start in
September September October November I
guess like eight months who are still
struggling and one thing I think you did
really well is one you took the content
really quickly
you built and like fell in love with
your portfolio like you're like my
portfolio is is where I post stuff you
documented stuff really well and then
you networked I mean those are really
like honestly that's what data career
jumpstart is all about it's like those
three things it's like can you work fast
can you make projects and can you
network and you did those three things
well I think that's why I led to you
know your success so quickly you know I
think I think at the end of the day
that's that's pretty much you know how
you got to where you're at and now now
you're helping other people now you're
learning more I know you've been
mentioning you've been learning a ton of
sequel on the job and and that's the
whole point right like yeah I think I
told you this straight up because we had
a call before you joined data career
jumpstart I said I don't really want to
take you from being nothing to the the
best data scientist on planet Earth
I want to help you get your first job
get your foot in the door so you can get
paid to learn
yep
absolutely and that's what you're going
to do now right and hopefully I mean
tell the people what you're what you're
learning and then what your what your
goals are so yeah definitely I during
the interview process itself it was
actually very conversational we never
talked about anything that I wasn't I
never had to say too many times it was
is very good I love talking to I had
basically so I had three interviews back
to back to back from I think nine
o'clock to 12 o'clock in the morning but
it was I wasn't sweating it was like the
most genuine so I got to interview with
my director who I currently direct uh
report to right now a senior manager and
then another a senior director too which
who all work on my current team and they
were they're absolutely amazing people
and I love them and one thing I want to
shout out about my director and why I
love densu so much so I've only been
working there for a little over two
months and we have flexible time time
off so fto and she's like Stephen you've
been working for two months you haven't
taken time off you should take some time
off I've never worked for a company that
told me hey you need to just you know
you might burn out just take a break
take it off and I'll say okay that's
cool
but yeah anyway that is awesome yeah
it's it's been an absolute Journey so
they they have been teaching me a lot of
things so that was one thing that they
made sure of in the interview process
have you been exposed to SQL have you
been exposed to Tableau have you been
exposed to python so I only had one
technical question during that whole
interview which was so here's a table
and then she described the columns and
here's another table she doesn't care
how would you join these or what join
would you use and I was able to I
actually had a definition of all the
joins because I I kind of knew that they
might ask some join question on one of
my screens I have three screens
basically so I had on one of my screens
I had I had oh what a full join was I
was like oh full joint sounds like
something I would want to use she's like
yeah that's that's what you would use
and I was like cool that's about all I
know about SQL besides you know the main
definitions select from where group buy
all that kind of stuff but yeah they're
basically giving me SQL lessons right
now and I've just been learning I know
python is just learning pandas SQ alert
sklearn a little bit more and stuff like
that so it's definitely the ideal
situation of getting getting paid to
learn and knowing from the get-go what
the expectation was really made it easy
for me to transition into it and I'm
really excited to learn more there's one
thing I want to talk about is like so
many people are asking for advice
they're saying like oh you know so much
about data analytics I'm literally the
first rung on the ladder of data but
like the way I think about it is there's
a there's a big gap from the floor to
the first rung to like you know the
ladder of data so people are asking me
so many things and I'm trying my
absolute best and I'm a people pleaser
by by Nature so I try to answer every DM
try to call answer every comment and
it's it's starting to burn me out a
little bit so I'm not forcing myself too
much but it's just crazy to me that
people are
relying on me or like trusting me with
helping them in their career when I'm
literally just the first rung on that
ladder so it's been super humbling and
it's been super great to help out the
community any way that I can
yeah totally well I think I think in
order to be like a teacher or like a
mentor you really only have to be one
step ahead of of the people you know
that you're teaching so I think I think
that's that's totally fine and and at
the end of the day we're all still
learning you never will know everything
in data so it all it all works out in
the end and I think I think people
talking to you is a good thing for them
but I totally understand the burnout
aspect that's one of the reasons why you
know before before I had the data career
jump start when I was still working my
nine to five at Exxon I did a lot of
mentorship I did a lot of live calls I
did a lot of dming and it got to a point
where I was like okay I'm at my absolute
cap for what I can do you know at this
point and that's why one of the reasons
why I started data career jumpstart but
awesome stuff I'm super I'm I'm not
stupid I'm super stoked for you and your
your journey the way I see like your
next your next you know couple years
like you know you're gonna nail a bunch
of SQL right now you're gonna learn a
bunch of SQL on the job get really good
at SQL
um you know do really learn the business
because I think marketing something
that's new to you it'd be new to me as
well like really learn your domain and
then you know maybe you know I guess you
started in February or March you know
maybe six years down the road or not six
years a year or two down the road you
know maybe you switch to a different
team or or maybe you go into like a data
scientist role and you do that for two
to three years and then you know all of
a sudden you're you're like an expert
you know data guy in marketing you
combine those two things that's a huge
Niche I I see such a bright future for
you man I'm super excited for you and
couldn't couldn't be more more happy for
you also couldn't happen to a better
person so congratulations on all your
success you know just just to recap 15K
new job that has way more you know place
to expand 3 000 followers on LinkedIn in
like in like four months basically
that's crazy and I think it goes a huge
Testament to who you are as a person
right thank you so much Avery yeah I
just like I said you're we're one of my
mentors in this data journey and you've
been an absolute huge help in everything
so I love everything that dcj has been
able to let me do and grow it's still
it's still helping me even after I
finished you know most of those projects
so looking forward to that sequel part
when that comes out oh it's it's coming
out it's coming out soon so yeah looking
looking forward to that as well and yeah
great stuff any any parting words you'd
like to leave the people with yeah so
it's it's gonna be a tough road but like
I I don't want to say that because of my
skills I got to where I am but I one
thing that my brother I've heard my
brother say is that luck favors those
who are prepared so I I want to say I'm
very blessed and I'm very lucky to have
meet the people that I have met and also
to get to be in the position that I have
I am in but the thing is you got to be
prepared you know you got to put the
work in you got to study you got to
learn and like when luck when luck
happens to you you're prepared so that's
just one thing I would say for sure for
sure I like that well Stephen it's been
an absolute pleasure we'll have your
link to your LinkedIn down below and
yeah we'll see you more on LinkedIn we
look forward to more posts I hope you
enjoyed that episode and if you did I'm
gonna have an awesome free master class
that I know you're going to love we're
going to talk about a lot of things this
episode talked about you can get it
absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: 3-Step Guide To Building Your First Data Science Project

Description: You just learned SQL or Python, or Tableau. But you don‚Äôt know how to build your data science project? In this episode, Avery shares a 3-step guide to building your first data science project.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Timestamps:
1:28 - Art is theft, and so is the data science project
4:02 - Find ideas on Towards Data Science Medium
5:32 - Read a few articles to get inspiration
6:05 - Avery‚Äôs strategy is doing 30 projects in 30 days
9:08 - How academia finds inspiration to write
11:01 - Take Avery‚Äôs project, replicate and do it

Mentioned Links:
Building 30 Data Science Projects in 30 days: https://youtu.be/kKmA9ihIg20
I Used Data Science to UNCOVER McDonald‚Äôs Healthiest Meal: https://youtu.be/3bbFc1225-4


Video Transcript:
what's up you guys welcome back to
another episode of the data career
podcast in this video or this podcast
I'm going to be talking about how you
can build your next or your first data
analytics project in a really easy three
to four step guide that's going to take
you you know about two hours to get
started with your first project this is
the data career podcast episode 45.
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith
if you guys have been part of my world
for any length of time you know that I'm
a huge believer and a huge proponent for
data science projects I think data
projects are the cheat code to Landing
your first or next data job if you've
been to my webinar then you know you've
heard of the SPN method which I believe
everyone needs to use to land their next
data job as standing for skills be
studying for projects and portfolio and
understanding for Network so literally
in my opinion projects are a third of
Landing your next data job if you
haven't been to that webinar there'll be
a link in the description down below to
go check it out totally worth it free
about 45 hour long
action-packed and will help you make
good decisions in your data career
Journey but today we are here to talk
about projects and focus on data science
projects and how you can build your
first or your next data science project
in the easiest way possible and first I
want to start by saying a quote from
Pablo Picasso and you're probably
thinking Avery what does Pablo Picasso
have anything to do with data analytics
and data science and the answer is I
don't know probably not much but he has
this quote and he says and keep in mind
this is Picasso this is like the person
who's best at Art in the world all time
maybe one of the all-time greats at
making beautiful art pieces so that's
who this is coming from keep that in
mind and he said all art is theft
now think about that for a second say it
again all art is theft now what did
Picasa one of the greatest painters
artists of all time why would he say
that that all art is theft
and in my opinion it's because it's true
now not necessarily theft as in copy
carbon copy blank plagiarism but the
idea is that there is no original art
there's nothing original in this world
and we are all just mixtures of what our
environment and different factors in our
lives are and we are we base our actions
off of those and so the idea is that
there's no original art but all artists
are inspired by the people that went
before them and for instance I don't
know exactly when Picasso lived I'm not
my art history is not that great but
Picasso might have taken things from I
don't know Michelangelo and who does the
scream see I'm very bad at my painters
Michelangelo and I don't know some other
famous painter and combines or taking
different ideas from this person and
that person combine them together and
made something totally new let's take a
Korean barbecue food you guys ever had
Korean barbecue there's Korean food and
then there's barbecue food you combine
those together and you're this Korean
barbecuer or Asian fusion or something
like that the idea that you can take
part of one thing part of another
combine them together and you'll get a
whole new thing now hopefully you're
still listening because I'm going to
relate this back to how that actually
matters when you're doing a data project
and literally in my opinion this is the
easiest way to get started with your
First Data project
just take the Pablo Picasso quote all
art is theft and replace it all data
projects are theft now once again I'm
not saying to go copy and paste someone
else's project I'm not saying that at
all please do not do that that is pledge
what I'm saying is be inspired here's
the steps right here step one go to
toward data science.com
awesome medium publication with loads of
different projects go there spend 30
minutes reading you're gonna find maybe
one to two projects that spoke to you
all right take one or two of them and
replicate it on your own so I do mean in
terms of the code or the visualization
literally try to copy their exact same
thing okay now once you're there you
cannot publish that would be plagiarism
that's stealing we don't want to do that
what you're going to do is take a
technique or some other data set or add
some point of analysis or technique that
you have that the original author did
not do and add it to this project so for
instance you might find a really cool
project on let's say a healthcare
analytics okay and they might have done
everything in Tableau my point is take
all it done in Tableau and then maybe
you can make an extra three graphs or
maybe you can take that data put it into
SQL run some cool queries or maybe run
that in Python and you create something
like that the point here is that you're
not starting from a blank page writers
they're always like it's always hard to
write from a blank page you always need
to warm up or have some sort of
inspiration and the theme is true with
data projects there's only so many
different types of data projects that
you can do in this world chances are
that there's been done one done that's
at least similar to what you're doing
now once again I am not saying go steal
that stuff but be inspired by that stuff
read two articles about Healthcare
analytics read a third copy the third
replicate it and then add techniques
from Article 1 and Article 2 on there
now the way that this is one of the
strategies that I used when I did 30
data science projects in 30 days that
was a huge feat to be doing one whole
data project every day and then posting
about it on YouTube making like a seven
eight minute video explaining it showing
it stuff like that that was a huge
undertaking so one of the techniques
that I actually used is this technique
which is where I went to towards data
science.com down a project I like
replicated it and then Twisted it five
to eight things about it and you can
always a tribute to the original article
so a really concrete example of this was
like day 28 or day 29
and during those 30-day science projects
in 30 days you guys can go find us on
YouTube the whole tutorials there it's
the product it did about optimizing a
McDonald's mchealthy menu basically
finding the most healthy at McDonald's
if you were trying to as calories
maximize proteins minimize fats I don't
know have a bunch of different
constraints set and make the most
perfect mchealthy meal at McDonald's so
I got that original idea from my friend
Kyle Pastor he actually did this project
a couple years ago and I remember he
showed me and I was like that is one of
the coolest projects I've ever seen and
so I always had in the back of my mind
that I would love to do something with
that data set maybe twist it a little
bit until when I did the 30 30 days
science projects in 30 days I realized
wow what if I just took Kyle's project
that he has already done he's already
posted about it I'm gonna take it I'm
going to replicate it and then I'm gonna
do something cooler with it I'm going to
improve it and so what I did for that
project was I turned the whole thing
into a python streamlit web application
so that it wasn't just sitting like it
wasn't just to us Cody people or us
dated people where in order to use the
mcalthy menu Optimizer you had to be
running Python and be setting everything
in the python script I made it a public
web app so anyone in the world I could
send it to my mom I could set it to my
hand I could send it to my uncle and
they could be using the same tool and it
took me a long time to to put it up as a
web application but I did that and
that's a data project it's a separate
data project from Kyle's I use Kyle's
code and everything that I did but I
used a lot of extra code to make
something new and so you guys can do
that as well you go find a cool project
and add to it now once again I this is a
very thin line I am never saying to copy
and paste I am never saying to
plagiarize but just realize that there's
been a lot of work done before you and
you can use the work that's been done
before you right like you can use tools
and resources that are there to help you
it's almost like you want to do a data
visualization project and you're like no
I'm not going to use Tableau because
someone else built Tableau and that's
cheating I have to use pencil and paper
to make all my graphs and stuff like
that no use Tableau because it's
available too and so if there's
different tutorials different projects
posted online use those to your
advantage take those projects look at
them see what you like replicate it on
your own and then add your own twist
it is seriously that simple and if
you've been really struggling to make
your first data project
start there because that is one of the
easiest things you can do it's basically
copying and pasting with a Twist right
you're going to provide your own twist
at the end but at least the start of the
ideas they can come from someone else
and once again you could take two
separate projects and combine them
together that right there is a great
project and that maybe even takes a
little less Ingenuity a little less
thinking this is exactly what they did
research in Academia I don't know how
many of you guys have an academic
background I don't have a PhD I do have
a masters but I don't have a PhD but
when I was a Junior and senior in
college I was actually working with a
professor doing research and I actually
published a paper where I was the first
author and the first author just means
that you were the main person writing
the paper and the main person doing the
research behind it and mine was in data
analytics in chemical large chemical
systems
and through that process I basically
learned that the way that you make a
publication the way that you come up
with a novel idea one that's good enough
to be published is by actually just
reading a bunch of papers
seeing when a person at University of
Wisconsin did see when a person at
University of Miami did LA and maybe a
Switzerland paper here and there reading
a bunch of different papers seeing the
different approaches and taking three or
four of them and combining them that
right there is something novel that's
worth being published in the academic
world and the same is true and the data
projects read five projects see how they
did everything take the data set from
one the technique from another bam
project take the data set from another
the date of this from another and you
got another project like you could
literally mix and match these projects
so well and by doing that you're almost
gonna have a guide teaching you how to
do all these projects and all the
techniques in them and you're really
going to learn so it's a win-win because
you are going to be building a project
you are going to be learning and just
always make sure that you're attributing
the project and the people that came
before you right we're all standing on
the shoulders of the of our forefathers
or some quote like that and the coolest
part you guys is I've actually done 30
day science projects for you already
I've given you access to all of the code
all of the data and the video explaining
each and every one of them so I'm going
to have the link to that in the
description down below you can watch
this awesome playlist I have 30 ideas
for you you can take one of my projects
replicate it add some stuff you could
take two of my projects combine the
technique from one with the data set
from another that's another project you
guys yourselves will have 30 data
science projects maybe not in 30 days I
know this method works you guys and I'd
be stoked for you guys to check it out
also if you guys have not been to my how
to land the data job even without
experience webinar I highly recommend
that so you guys can check out in the
description down below and lastly the
data career podcast is back if you guys
couldn't tell I'm releasing a new
episode every single week right now so
if you guys are enjoying it please leave
a five-star rating wherever you listen
to podcasts and if you're on Apple I
would extra appreciate it if you left a
review and you can even say in the
review what you'd like to hear on the
show I do read every reply that we have
and they mean a lot to me so thank you
guys so much for listening this week's
episode and we will talk later I hope
you enjoyed that episode and if you did
I'm gonna have an awesome free master
class that I know you're going to love
we're going to talk about a lot of
things this episode talked about you can
get it absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: From a Teacher to a Data Analyst w/ Chris French

Description: Do you need to be active on Linkedin to land a data job? What should you post or even do on the platform? 

In this episode, Avery sits down with teacher-turne Data Analyst Chris French to discuss how he landed his first data job leveraging Linkedin.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Chris‚Äôs Links:
Connect on LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/chris-french-data/

Timestamps:
09:07 - How Chris grow Linkedin from 20 followers to 20,000 followers
13:19 - His content types that gain attention
18:02 - What Chris would do differently to do the job search
23:29 - Technical skills vs soft skills
26:53 - Before land data job, analyze your process first


Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I sit down with data analyst
Chris French and we discuss how he went
from teacher to data analyst in like two
months you guys it's absolutely crazy he
talks about how he used LinkedIn cold
messaging and really utilizes the SPN
method to land his first data job and
grow his LinkedIn audience a thousand
times what he started with this is the
data career podcast episode 44. welcome
to the data career podcast the podcast
that helps aspiring data professionals
land their next data job here's your
host Avery Smith
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast I'm super excited
for my guest today it is Chris French
Chris is a former teacher turned data
analyst at LPL Financial Chris documents
his journey into the data space on
LinkedIn and shares lots of useful tips
he's well worth following on LinkedIn if
you're just starting your data Journey
or if you're like on that path and so
make sure you go into the show notes and
follow Chris on LinkedIn Chris welcome
to the show
I appreciate Avery thanks so much for
having me on your podcast hey I'm stoked
to have you here we were just talking
before we got on the podcast you said
your life's kind of a whirlwind right
now of all these different things
happening I'm going to go ahead and let
you tell a story of how you got to know
me and how we got to link up in one way
and then we'll dive into how you landed
your job as a data analyst after that
but first from your perspective how did
you meet me in kind of my world
no I appreciate it and I it's funny
outside because I remember when I was
starting out I know I started pretty
much like the middle of September just
starting on my journey and when I
started on LinkedIn I literally had
nowhere to go I had no idea who to reach
out to how to really do much of anything
just me being a math teacher and want to
break into Data I found a connection she
was one of your students a shout out to
Courtney Ballard what's her name and we
talked for a little bit and I was like I
saw her work and I was like that looks
really great like how'd you know that
like where'd you learn and she's like oh
I took a class from Avery Smith and I'm
like okay I'm gonna check it out myself
so I think taking
your 21 days of data challenge really
got me that jump start into my journey
and ever since from there it really has
a you're it's been a whirlwind It's A
lot's definitely happened but that
definitely was the start of my journey
was joining your 21 days of data class
that's awesome so that was like what
September of last year or something like
that yeah it was the end of September I
think something like that was like it
was like the one the first like true
course I ever took was your class Okay
and like how did you even know before
that you wanted to break into Data being
a person I who come from like a sports
background I've played baseball my whole
life through college and I just think
being in that sport consistently
everything being driven through
statistics projections data itself it
really was something that I was doing a
lot in my life that I didn't realize so
I really have had a huge connection
towards anything of that perspective and
then also moving into to becoming a math
teacher we're just then like I said
before like using my knowledge of
Statistics data and just talking about
math it just really I felt because my
previous experiences in sports and as a
teacher that I felt like I I like data
analytics but I want that to make my
career but I never really knew
what that could be or what position that
was and that's where I could stumbled
upon data analysis as a career and I'm
like I this is exactly what I like to do
and I know I'm good at it so let me go
make this a career so I really feel like
I said the experience as an athlete and
as a teacher really led me to this being
my career path yeah that is cool so you
kind of already had the math background
and then the sports backgrounds you know
especially baseball not as much now I
mean still a little bit now but just
like baseball was so you know data
driven in the past so that's that's
really neat okay so then did you have a
LinkedIn before this was it like just
like a a shell of itself or were you new
to LinkedIn last year so I have had
LinkedIn before like five six years ago
and I only had it for a month or two I
never used it for creating any type of
content I use it because at that time
five six years ago I was in the sports
training industry so on LinkedIn there
is a huge community of people in that
industry and I felt like I was learning
a lot from that but I got off of it
because I just felt in that perspective
in that industry there's a lot of people
that were very I wouldn't say toxic but
just wasn't the right environment that I
want to learn from so I jumped out of
that and I think from that event it was
like hesitant for me to jump into
LinkedIn to get into Data analysis but I
realized that in in my opinion it's
highly it's a necessity you have to
almost do it so I'm like okay let me
start this up I just want to get a job
that's it I'm not trying to do anything
crazy I just want to use hopefully my
networking skills to land a job so this
definitely was once again out of my
comfort zone
and yeah they're definitely it happened
quick a lot of things on LinkedIn
happened pretty quick but just yeah just
using it and talking to people who have
gotten other jobs in other Industries
the power of using networking and
Linkedin and I realized that if I really
want to get into his career and lots of
other people are trying to get to it too
I gotta do something to stand out I have
to do something that's going to get
someone's attention and just sending in
applications at one after another is
just not going to get the job done okay
so then sudden you're like okay I'm
gonna get back on to LinkedIn you're
going through your LinkedIn time feed
Courtney Ballard's post who is one of my
boot camp students and you're like wow
okay this is awesome I like the stuff
she's posting and shout out to Courtney
Courtney is an amazing student does
amazing data projects just landed not
just she's celebrating one month working
I think at Wells Fargo or another big
bank I can't remember as a lead guys get
this a lead she's she was also a math
teacher she is now a lead data analytic
consultant I think is her title so
that's really amazing that she was able
to land that job you joined 21 days to
data which is a program that I ran last
year and basically a bunch of math stuff
but is that kind of the basis of a lot
of the data analytics world that you
dove into
yeah it never really had any experience
with any like the technical stuff like
SQL or python or anything like that just
released some Excel like doing regular
Excel spreadsheets using my math
knowledge to do stuff like that in
school setting and in my sports training
business was all I've really done I
remember before I dove into Data
analysis I was really unsure of what I
wanted to get into so for like two three
weeks before that I was looking into
like software engineering to trying that
out and realizing that to me doing
something like coding just doesn't click
right away from me it just doesn't so I
really found that data analysis while
something like now I realized like
something like SQL or python there is
coding involved but it just clicks way
way easier than something in the
software realm so definitely joining the
class gave me a great perspective on SQL
a little bit more python which to me you
know was great to see and just see how
much could be done with those programs
and it was really fulfilling to do this
work and be like hey I could I typed a
bunch of these words and look what came
out pretty much it was great to see
final product of this work so it really
got me a lot of confidence I feel like
especially in that the coding aspect
that I lacked coming into it yeah I
that's so great to hear I loved running
21 days to data we're gonna bring it
back this year in some sort of form one
thing that you know you just mentioned
that was this program that I was putting
on taught you a lot of the tech skills
like the sequel that we talked about the
tablet a little bit of python but one
thing that's really unique about that
program and is true of any of the
programs that I do is it's not only
focused on the tech skills but it's also
focused on the networking so I created
this thing called the ESPN method and
it's in my opinion the easiest way to
land a data job and I think you're a
great example of the ESPN method as
standing for skills P standing for a
portfolio and n stands for network and
you really need all three to land your
First Data job and so as part of this
part of this course we are learning the
tech skills it was meant for zero right
we're learning Excel SQL Tableau we're
building a project the entire time in
this course but then I'm also having you
post on LinkedIn every day in this
course which is something that a lot of
students gave me pushback on Avery I
don't want to do that Avery this is a
data course this is in a LinkedIn course
but you loved it it seems and you really
adopted it to it so can you talk a
little bit about the LinkedIn and
because at this point you probably still
haven't really created that many
LinkedIn posts in your life before the
this course the first post I made was
the day I signed up your course I just
made like a post saying oh I'm excited
to join so that was like literally the
first time I ever posted and coming from
I'm not that old like I have Twitter
Instagram of all that but I don't really
use it I don't use it at all so like
doing anything like that is severely
uncomfortable for me to put myself out
there and post because like it's just
not my thing it's not how I am but
I will say your course literally got me
going on LinkedIn like literally like
the fact that hey every day here's
something to post about and even like
even if it didn't sometimes a lot of
people want to get traction quickly to
the post but
yeah that's not always going to happen
but regardless I was like you know what
I learned this today I want to talk
about it I learned this that day I want
to talk about it and what was great and
this is also not like me is I'm very
independent I like to learn on my own
sometimes and being in let's say a class
or a group is definitely out of my
comfort zone so having being a group of
people who are also doing the same thing
encouraging commenting supporting each
other got me going way way more to the
you know what like I don't have anything
crazy to talk about today but you know
what I did work on this in the class so
I want to talk about it so it really got
me the courage and the confidence to put
myself out there every day so I'm very
grateful for that aspect because the
aspect stood out so much to me the whole
like at the end of every day hey post
this talk about this and it really
motivated me moving forward that's
awesome because at the time do you know
how many connections you had
I started 20 25 something like that what
are you at today
I think I just cracked 20 000 followers
today I think yeah I think I was like
really close I think you hit it during
this right before the session because I
checked earlier today and you were like
at 19. so if you're at twenty thousand
sixty as of what I'm looking at right
now yeah 20 000 followers so you went
from did you say 20 to 20 000 20 when I
started yeah okay so that's if my math
isn't wrong that's like times a thousand
or something like that it's gone quick
and I've been lucky to have one one or
two do fairly close to fairly decent
that I've caught a lot of people's
attention but it's great to have people
want to follow along a journey and I
just try to be myself
be a real person and ups and downs just
how my day goes or what's on my mind and
I just think that's what a lot of people
need sometimes when they try breaking
the data just being realistic just being
just being you and I just feel I don't
know how it I don't know how it's
happened I don't know I don't know
sometimes how 20 000 people decide to
want to give me a follow but I
appreciate every single person that's
done along this way people sometimes
think I don't want to create content on
LinkedIn and and I say well you don't
have to create it you just document it
and I think that's something you do
really well is you just document what
you're doing what you're working on how
you're feeling your UPS your Downs you
know what worked for you what didn't
work for you and that's that's really
um
yeah I think it's really interesting for
a lot of people and that they want to be
part of that they want to watch that I
think you've done a fantastic job at
that
especially when you're in a place where
you it doesn't really matter if someone
knows you want a new job or not like a
lot of other people maybe won't be able
to do the exact same thing as you did
because they're going to need they don't
want their employer to know your
employer if you don't care if your
employer knows you're looking for a job
or if you don't currently have a job the
documentation of your job hunt is
actually the thing that often will get
you a job because that's what shows
someone cares that's what shows someone
has a lot of willingness to put in the
effort that they have the ability to do
things is they're showing it right
because you could have been doing all
all the effort in the worlds but if you
don't tell me how am I supposed to know
so that's one thing I think you did
extremely well is document your whole
experience I think that was fun for a
lot of people and they enjoyed it
yeah I really I do tell almost anyone
and it's a hard thing to do and it's
like I said that's come from a person
who four months ago was scared to even
click post it's hard to put yourself out
there especially in like the opposite
like the UPS are easy
but the down moments are really
difficult but I just felt that
you know it's I was told like LinkedIn
keep you know things professional talk
about this but I'm like you know what I
had a great day like the other day I
created my first like Tableau dashboard
that got that's now being used at my
company and it felt great it's like well
I'm just be hey um I feel good about
this I just want to talk about it or if
there's something that's on my mind
where I see something I just want to
talk I like having creating
content that Sparks conversation
relatability I always like talking to
people I always love when people come
into the comments and have discussions
in there it feels really great
um but yeah I just think the big thing
is when people are starting out
like especially if you're a teacher or
you know you're coming there's a lot of
people out there for example are
teachers transition teachers are a big
one and you need a group of people
strong connections by your side going
through this process so being able to
put yourself out there you don't have to
go out there and make crazy Carousel
posts like like everyone else you don't
have to do that you just have to be you
and I'm telling you there's no
guarantees but it will make a difference
it'll help you so much more through the
process and during that during those
posts that's how recruiters were finding
me because they were seeing that they're
like hey we see you working we see you
doing these courses let's talk like we
see what you're trying to do here so I
think just showing the real me and The
Human Side of Me Like helped a lot with
people reaching out to me for employment
and is that how is that what happened is
that how you ended up Landing your job
was from one of those recruiters
so actually actually it was just I
honestly cold applied for the job I just
applied because I saw that I saw my the
company I'm at right now LPL and any
very huge remote oriented focus and I
just really I want to be in finance I
like the sector I really want to be in
it and in my situation I
I could be moving very soon so I had to
be a very specific had to be remote for
right now and I just called applied and
I got and I just reached out a couple
Recruiters on LinkedIn mentioning the
job I applied for
the link to it and just see if they give
it a look and then the next day I got a
auto rejection
but then I saw the recruiter check this
message and an hour later he's like hey
actually we want to take you in for an
interview so it's funny like how I guess
that happens like I never got a response
but it's showing that extra effort in
using Recruiters on LinkedIn and doing
it the right way will help them because
you never know sometimes you could they
could get Auto rejected by something and
they might look at it like oh actually
this resume is not bad it fits what
we're looking for so actually hold on
let's give this one a look so I think
it's good to always do a little extra
work except just applying and hoping for
the best doing the extra work reaching
out to recruiters or current people at
companies will go a long way okay I'm
gonna dive into that a little bit deeper
you found this job on LinkedIn jobs
yeah yeah I'm all I only use LinkedIn I
only did I just felt everything I need
is right there so that's all I'm going
to use I've had I've used other websites
but I've never ever had success with it
I went on LinkedIn I found it and I went
right to their company website and just
because I was at that point getting
better responses that way so I just did
it that way I just went right to the
company website and I immediately were
finding recruiters I found a couple from
the company and um yes on LinkedIn yeah
okay so you find the job listing on
LinkedIn you apply to it on the
company's website you find recruiters at
that company send them a cold message
and you get Auto rejected by like the
ATS or something like that in the
company website but one of the
recruiters read your cold message and
actually liked you and wanted to talk to
you yeah 100 yep exactly that way yeah
okay so this is awesome because once
again this goes back to the whole SPN
method skills portfolio Network
your your resume was the same resume
that went in the cold message that went
into the automatic tracking system and
there's probably lots of people
listening right now who have applied to
a lot of jobs but I wonder how many of
the times they've actually called
messages cold message the recruiter
about that same job and in your
particular case you could still be
looking for a job you could be working
somewhere else maybe if you hadn't have
done this cold message to you was like
super vital
yeah I and I now if I were to go about
it I would do things differently but yes
I always would try to especially look
for if I was a second connection let's
say on LinkedIn of a recruiter I think
that would help a little bit but I
always would do research into recruiters
and I wouldn't just pick a random person
I had to make sure that the recruiter
was in the sector I wanted to be in like
I'm not gonna reach out to recruiter in
sales and marketing when I'm trying to
get in for a technical role so I think
like doing your research even with those
recruiters is important especially
you're going to a large company picking
the right recruiters seeing if they're
active on LinkedIn like I may I also
look to see okay this guy has been
commenting and posting the last couple
days like most likely he will see my
message or I probably wouldn't reach out
to a person who hasn't been active in
three or four months I probably won't do
that because that will most most likely
not work so I did I really went in depth
with the recruiters and seeing who was
active are they in the right sector I
want to be in and I really took the time
to do it that way instead of just
picking a random recruiter and sending a
message that makes a lot of sense I
think that's really wise you also
mentioned you wouldn't necessarily do it
that way now what advice would you have
for people who are trying to land their
first day to job they're trying to
network their way and what would you say
to them it's still the same thing
applying and reach out to recruiters
through messaging but I think something
and I just talked to someone earlier
today about it is I would try to even
before that like engage with if you're
looking for a company like say at LPL
and I see a position I want for maybe a
day I'll try to
um
let's say engage with their content or
any posts that they're on just so they
could see my name a little bit
and then I'll send a connection request
and then that way because I had someone
asked me that using emails through
Linkedin I think if you have regular
LinkedIn you only have five a month and
most of these recruits are probably
third connections you're gonna you're
gonna blow through is five really quick
so I think like really try and create
actual start like introduction through
engaging with them through comments or
through a Content will help a lot which
will then lead into when you message
them they already know you're they've
seen you they could have an idea so it's
not just a random person messaging you
so I think if you could think almost
like ahead of time like in the moment it
might be a little tough but if you like
pick companies are really interested in
really trying to connect with certain
recruiters and start that relationship
now so then when something comes up
that introduction you don't really have
to introduce yourself you already have
seen each other a little bit so I think
that it's tough when you want to get
that job right in the moment but if you
think start now create relationships
then when something opens down a line it
makes it way simpler should I say yeah I
totally agree we had ASA Howard on the
show last week and he said something
very similar he basically said by the
time the recruiter like I actually
reached out the recruiter they actually
knew my name and so it wasn't it wasn't
actually that hard to get an interview
and then the interview went really
smoothly you guys have a very similar
messages there now how has how has the
job been so far has it been overwhelming
what's it like compared to teaching
oh boy and compared to teaching oh my
goodness it's I love it I literally love
it I there's honestly everything I was
looking for in a job you know working
from home definitely
was weird for the first week almost like
hey like I should be getting up at 5am
and getting ready to commute an hour
into Philadelphia and just sit in a
classroom all day but I love it my team
which was great which I appreciate LPL
through their interview process meaning
basically my whole entire team on my
panel interview super helpful
great feel like they're very my team's
very split a lot of them are great at
Excel and with stuff like Microsoft
Access and some are really great at SQL
and Tableau so I get a lot of great
perspectives from there very
knowledgeable manager is amazing I love
it it's been amazing it really has been
amazing and I really have a great
fulfillment when doing this work when
I'm doing this the data the cleaning
creating dashboards it really my brain
likes it my brain really likes it I like
the pace and compared to teaching I try
not to talk too negative at teaching but
just you know the increase in pay the
work life balance I actually have for
the first time in my adult life it's
been great I still miss teaching at some
times there's the idea of teaching kids
doing math but the trade-offs the pros
of being a data analyst especially in my
position has been a blessing that's
awesome I love to hear that and I'm 100
with you that I would never want to say
anything negative about teachers they're
doing the Lord's work that's hard stuff
but man it sure feels good not having to
be there from seven to seven in the
grading and the annoying kids and stuff
like that but but obviously obviously we
love our teachers they're awesome and
just to recap because I don't think I
don't think I emphasize this enough
September of 2022 you're like yeah I
think I want to do this data stuff I
like math
you get back on LinkedIn you kind of
connect with Courtney you hop into one
of my programs you learn you knew Excel
already right then you add SQL you add
Tableau you finish the program pretty
quickly you start posting on LinkedIn
you're starting to get Garner attention
you're getting your offer how many like
what time frame was that I think the
exactly November 13th was when I got my
offer 13 12 something like that it's
like middle November I got my job offer
which it shocked me when they called me
because I I was getting a couple
interviews before that were way
different types of process some were
four interviews some were like three and
after I got the call after my second
interview like oh we won't move on to
the next step and I'm like okay when's
the next one and they're like no that's
it we won't give you the job but I'm
like you're not gonna do it no way like
I was in the middle of my class on my
lunch break and I'm like oh my gosh no I
almost hung up the phone with a person
like no you're not you're lying right to
me right now so I just it went very
quick I I try to remain confident myself
but I always wonder like how did it
happen that quick because I know for a
fact that my technical skills are
they're
they're average there's just one entry
little person should be but that's why I
over emphasize the LinkedIn and just
having the soft skills like be able to
communicate be able to and I think I get
that from teaching be able to talk to
people work with others get in front of
anyone and speaking I just really think
that helped me a lot through the
interview process and I think it helped
me click with the people right away and
in my mindset knowing okay this guy is
okay at best at doing the technical work
but he's a decent guy who will learn
this and become a really great analyst
and I just think from that point on I'm
like okay
like there's you never know we're gonna
get with some job opportunity some
emphasize some things more than others
but if I could get it in that time frame
it just really opened up a lot of eyes
to me of what some people look for and
it happened very quick very quick it
happened so I was I'm not complaining
but everything's moving very fast but
I'm very appreciative of my company
giving me a chance okay I love that and
it did happen very quickly for you and I
agree it's and I respect your skills but
I don't think you got it that fast
because of your skills it's even if you
were like in like very high level skills
I think it's even hard to know that
quickly and through interviews I think
it's hard to know and so what it really
came down to is the p in the end right
like the SBN method it's not just the
skills often people are like oh I'm not
ready to land a day job I guess I should
go learn more SQL or more python okay
that's great but what about your
portfolio what about your network
because at this point I know you at
least had one project from the program
to show off I just love the fact that
you're you're a living proof of the SBN
method that it is really a third you
can't just focus on the skills you got
to focus on your portfolio and how to
focus on your network as well okay Chris
anything else you want to say to the
people who are aspiring data analysts
they want to they want to get a job
quickly like you any last bit tips of
advice I think the biggest advice just
come from what I've been seeing is
from being on I know I say a lot with
LinkedIn but good people always want to
help other good people so if you're just
being a genuine you're trying to be
genuine you're connecting with the right
people and you're doing the right thing
on LinkedIn like you will meet
someone or somebody that will give you
that opportunity obviously things have
to be in line you have to make sure your
portfolio is good resonates all good to
go but at the same time like recruiters
want these jobs get filled you know I
mean they really they don't want to work
any harder to fill these jobs so showing
curiosity being genuine and using the
power of LinkedIn really can help you
along your journey breaking in data I
like to have a very structured job
search like when I went through mine I
obviously as I said before I want to
work in the financial sector
so how I went about it was I looked at
my resume
and I'm okay like I want to look at what
the financial companies are looking for
because usually they have some
similarities between them so I looked
into it and I'm like okay my resume is
now tailored towards these more of these
financial sector jobs and what they're
looking for and from there I would focus
on only the financial companies for me I
want a remote I want to actually work in
a large company and I had a very strict
criteria right
as that went along I also kind of
analyzed my job search so as I gave like
a week I'm like okay I'm gonna try this
approach give it a week see how many
callbacks I get and then from there I'm
like okay maybe do I want to go into
Healthcare now okay let me look at
Healthcare and then let me see what kind
of are they similar and what they need
in there job descriptions are they
similar but for me I didn't get that
point because I got my role when I did
but really like I think having you know
a focus on the type of sector I'm going
like one or two of them and having
resume set for each will help you a lot
because in my advice my experience is
when you just throw in your application
out to anyone that says data analysts in
it you're just gonna drive yourself
insane like you're not really gonna get
any answers of what's working what's not
working so having more of a structured
approach to what you're looking for so
to answer your question I probably would
stick with the field one go in and keep
it strict go for what you want to really
want first and as time goes on like okay
depending on what's happening are you
getting calls are you not if you're not
getting calls maybe I'll loosen up some
things if you are getting calls then
something's working so I think if you
can really take like this next week or
so
and actually analyze your job search
will go a long way
awesome that was a great answer I love
that stay structured I hope you enjoyed
that episode and if you did I'm gonna
have an awesome free masterclass that I
know you're going to love we're going to
talk about a lot of things this episode
talked about you can get it absolutely
for free at datacrejumpster.com training
or using the link in the show notes down
below hope to see you there

Title: Should You Accept The Data Analytics Job Offer?

Description: You just got the data job offer. Should you accept it or not? In this episode, Avery discusses what pros and cons are there and deciding on accepting the job offer.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Timestamps:
0:58 - Jay got a data job offer but was in a dilemma
2:22 - Your past experience is ALWAYS relevant in the data world
2:59 - Job offer pros to look out
4:03 - Job offer cons to be aware of
5:57 - Avery takes on deciding job offer
7:53 - Job offer is beyond salary but perks & benefits


Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I talk about a situation that
you'll soon find yourself in is should
you accept this data job offer or not
this is data career podcast episode 43.
welcome to the data career podcast the
podcast that helps aspiring data
professionals land their next data job
here's your host Avery Smith
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast in this episode
we're going to be talking about
something that you will face if you have
not already faced it and that is what
should you do with your First Data offer
you know maybe you're sitting right here
and you're like I I'm just breaking in
the field I haven't quite got my first
data analytics job offer yet or maybe
like I've had three or four and no
matter how much experience with you have
with it it's difficult deciding like
what choice to make whether to accept it
or not and this episode was inspired by
a message that I actually got on
LinkedIn from a gentleman we'll call Jay
Jay says Hi Mr Smith I'm a big fan I'm
writing to see if you could help me with
deciding on whether or not to accept my
first data analyst job offer so this is
his first offer he's ever gotten as a
data analyst I currently work in
operations for an airline the job offer
is for an operations entry-level data
analyst position at a smaller Airline
the pros are is that it would be be a
way to get experience as an analyst and
it pays more than I currently make the
Cons are is it seems like a lot of
manual entry type work and only really
uses Excel plus I'd have to move out of
state although there is a chance of
working remotely
the other thing he said is he's done
seven out of the eight Google data
analytics professional certificates and
working on a couple different projects
leaning towards taking the job but not
sure if it's a great fit I would hate to
turn down a job offer that would lead to
experience and potentially an even
better paying job down the road so this
is my advice to jail let's first talk
about what Jay did really well and what
you can do really well you know Jay
doesn't have any data analytics
experience he says this is his first
data job offer right but I love what Jay
did is you know he works in operations
so the job he applied to is an
operations data analyst so he's using
and leveraging his past experience to
land this new job
next is it's for an airline and he
currently works for an airline once
again leveraging his experience that he
does have obviously it's not super data
related but your current or your past
experience is relevant in the data world
you just need to figure out how so if
you're a teacher we can find you an
educational data analyst job let's say
you've worked in marketing you can
become a marketing analyst no matter
what you've done in the past we can
somehow relate it to a data job in the
future now that does take a little bit
of effort to try to actually make all
those connections but I promise you if
you sit there hard enough you get the
right help you definitely can relate
your prior experience to your new data
job or your dream data job so I love
what Jay did there now Pros listed out
the pros here I love this get experience
as an analyst and it pays more than I
currently make okay that sounds like a
win-win right one of the things I say a
lot to my students inside the data
analytics accelerator program and just
on social media in general is let's
figure out how you can get paid to learn
data analytics you can learn from free
on YouTube the internet has so many
different resources this podcast is a
free way to learn you can pay by going
get a master's degree twenty thousand
dollars you know two years of your life
something like that or you can get paid
to learn and that's the method I prefer
and that's what Jay is saying here where
he's like I could get paid more than I'm
making now and I can get experience as
an analyst because that First Data job
that you get is by far the hardest data
job it will always be the hardest data
job that you get and just getting that
down on your resume is worth so much
because the next time it'll be easier
and then the next time it'll be easier
and then pretty soon won't even be a
problem so that First Data job is so
critical to get on a resume and if you
can get paid more it's pretty good but
let's talk about the cons so the cons
are there's a lot of manual entry that's
not fun no one really likes that and you
only use Excel I'm not the biggest Excel
fan of all time but Excel is really
powerful and you can do a lot of things
in Excel you can make graphs you can do
machine learning you can do a lot of
things things in Excel that you could
with other softwares now of course that
is still frustrating if you don't want
to be working in that environment but
hey who's to say you have to be there
the rest of your life and who's to say
that they're going to be using Excel for
the rest of their lives too he does go
on to say that the hiring manager did
seem a little bit frustrated with the
lack of data tools and just like the
data maturity in general so that is a
little bit of a red flag that we have to
think about but you know you're not
stuck here forever like it really you
could really transition after six months
after a year after two years right and
it could be really powerful to have this
on your resume get that experience and
then land your next job that's using
whatever tools you want to use now the
other con that Jay mentioned is you have
to move out of state now that one's hard
because I moved out of state when I got
my first data job I worked for Exxon
Mobil and so I moved to Houston Texas
away from Salt Lake City Utah
so that one's hard because it really
depends on how much you love where you
live I moved back to Utah because that's
how much I loved it but if you're
willing to like be kind of curious and
have a little bit of fun might be fun to
move out of state now I want you guys to
pause the podcast right now and just
think with the pros and cons that we've
talked about would you tell Jay to
accept this job
would you accept this job if you were
Jay and you might be in a similar
situation right now where you're
thinking I'm at this current job I don't
really love it but this job I don't know
if I'm really gonna love that job but at
least it's a data job you might be in
this exact situation and if you aren't
right now you probably have been in the
past or you will be in the future so
this is a good exercise to go through
and think man should I accept this job
or not
now hopefully you paused it and took a
second to think about it for me
personally my answer is it depends and I
know it's not the best answer because
it's like oh we want an actual answer
Avery but I think I need a little bit
more information from Jay and if you're
in the situation think about this a
little bit how many applications have
you sent out is this like your first
application that you sent out and you
got an offer on the first time or if you
sent out a hundred and this is the last
one you sent and you barely got a
response you know that can really
indicate for how long you've been trying
to land this data job and how like
desperate I don't like that word but you
know if you're really struggling this
might be a great entry step if you're
just starting off there might be
something better down the line coming
you know you just never know
how big is the pay bump that is a really
big indicator for me if we're talking
you know five thousand dollars then it
might be worth holding off a little bit
and see if we can get something a little
bit more substantial down the road but
if it's like a twenty or thirty thousand
dollar pay bump heck yeah let's take
that let's go make thirty thousand
dollars more than we were last year with
getting experience on a resume that is
getting paid to learn data analytics now
are you open to moving that's something
I talked about I really missed my family
when I was away from home and it's great
to be back but you might be open to a
new circumstance it might be fun to try
this new town also depends where the
town is if you told me I had to move to
like Wichita Kansas I'd be less excited
than if I was moving to like Miami
Florida so depends on where the new
place is as well so that is kind of my
thoughts to Jay I'm like you might want
to do it but you might not it really
just depends on the extra situation so
those are some questions to Think
Through is you know how far are you on
this journey of trying to transition if
you've been doing this for months you're
exhausted this might be a really good
stepping stone job you could be there
for eight months you hate it you go land
your next job you get another thirty
thousand dollar pay bump boom you're set
you're on a great path you might not
want to take it because you might have
just started you're like this is my
first application I sent out and it's
only five thousand dollars more I don't
really want to move you also want to
think about like the perks and the
benefits do they have good insurance do
they have like a 401k matching program
can you work remotely a little bit you
know is it a flexible work schedule are
you gonna like your co-workers are you
going to enjoy your manager is this an
industry you're really sick of maybe you
don't like Airlines anymore and you need
to move to something new there's a lot
of questions that you can ask yourself
when you're going through this and I
actually have another episode that I
created called something like 20 red
flags when you're looking for a job go
listen to that because that can also
help you make this good decision I hope
you enjoyed that episode and if you did
I'm gonna have an awesome free master
class that I know you're going to love
we're going to talk about a lot of
things this episode talked about you can
get it absolutely for free at
dailycarejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: How Cold Messaging Helped Him Land His First Data Analytics Job w/ Asa Howard

Description: Can cold messaging really land you your first data job? Even without experience?

In this episode, Avery sits down with logistics Data Analyst Asa Howard to discuss how he landed his first data job with a simple cold messaging strategy.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).


Asa‚Äôs Links:
Connect on LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/asa-howard/
Waitlist for Google Sheets course: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf6MmFwh-BqJmZVSIrxQzGvCpXWxqOStyM2zMffkM9whS2CCg/viewform

Timestamps:
3:22 - Asa realizes he needs a career pivot
5:21 - What a Solutions Engineer does (Logistics Analyst)
10:21 - System he used to land his job
14:24 - Cold message template you can steal
18:01 - What tools he uses on day to day
24:37 - Google Sheets vs Excel


Video Transcript:
in this episode of the data career
podcast I sit down with Asa Howard a
logistics data analyst and he walks us
through how he landed his first data job
even without experience through the
power of cold messaging this is the data
career podcast episode 44. welcome to
the data career podcast the podcast that
helps aspiring data professionals land
their next data job here's your host
Avery Smith
welcome back to another episode of the
data career podcast I'm super excited
for my guest today we have ASA Howard if
you guys don't know ASA I'll have all of
his links in the description down below
definitely go connect with him on
LinkedIn but ASA is a Solutions engineer
at Green Mountain technology where he
helps solve logistic problems with data
he studied Neuroscience in college at
Baylor University he's super passionate
about Google Sheets productivity and
sharing his data Journey so ASA welcome
to the podcast yes thank you Avery I'm
so excited to be here so the first thing
I want to talk about was a little bit
about how we connected because it's kind
of actually a funny story and I'll tell
it from my perspective and then maybe
you can you can kind of say where I
missed missed out but I'm trying to
think how this actually happened you
know ASA is married asa's wife does some
pretty cool things on YouTube and
Instagram and things like that and I
somehow started following your wife on
Instagram and I don't even know how I
did that did like do you guys do they
have Utah connections or were they
friends with like influencers in Utah
definitely yeah they have a lot of Utah
connections grew up there a lot of
families from there and have since moved
over to Texas okay that's probably what
it was was that it was like a you know
kind of a big Utah influencer following
there anyways and then I saw ASA on her
Instagram and I was like wow this guy's
pretty interesting he's talking about
Google Sheets and in a previous life he
was teaching people how to do well on
the ACT and I was like this is this is a
pretty cool guy so I started following
him on Instagram and then one day all of
a sudden on LinkedIn I get tagged in a
post and it's from from ASA and it was
like you know I talking about his daily
journey and how you know I think you
said something about how my posts were
helpful or something like that and I was
like wait that's the guy I follow on
Instagram and I was all confused from
your perspective too or no oh not at all
oh that's so funny yeah I started my
data Journey about a year ago and I was
kind of in this transition like he said
I was studying Neuroscience so thought I
was going to go into medicine and
totally realized that that was not for
me it was not my passion I was not good
at it and I had to Pivot and so part of
that pivot was like hey let's just go on
LinkedIn and see what we can find I
already kind of been dabbling in data a
little bit I had some python experience
but really didn't know much and probably
within the first couple weeks of being
on LinkedIn over a year ago I found
Avery's page and some of the stuff that
he was teaching was super super helpful
for my journey helped me get my feet
under me and get started and so I've
been following you for over a year now
and so it's so funny to hear that that
you had found me on Instagram and we
didn't even know each other at the time
yeah it's super funny so you were
following me on LinkedIn and I wasn't
following you and then I was following
you on Instagram okay I mean you are
following me so anyways it's just it's
just a funny world I'm pretty sure I
just followed you back on Instagram like
yesterday so sorry about that hey no
problem glad glad to have the follow uh
that's that's awesome okay so anyways
that's just a little bit about how we
got to know each other and and made that
connection I wanted to get into what you
do now because I know we said that you
studied neuroscience at Baylor wanted to
be a doctor found out that wasn't for
you I guess actually before we jump into
that like how did you know it's not for
you because there's a lot of people in
the audience today you know who are
listening who are like in a career that
that's that's not for them what was the
sign for you that was like oh my gosh I
don't think I want to do this okay yeah
there are lots of signs probably big red
flags honestly but my first semester of
school when I got to college I just did
horribly taking chemistry and biology
and I was failing most of my tests I've
always been a math guy even since like
three years old I've been such a math
guy went all the way through High School
I was the top of my class in calculus
and then I wanted to go to the science
field and everyone looked at me like I
was crazy and so you know I wasn't
really looking at the signals and
letting myself know okay this probably
isn't for me but I went with it anyway
and failed hard I ended up sticking with
Neuroscience though because I have
always been passionate about the brain
how the psychology of our Behavior Works
how you know how do memories work how do
we sense and see things and all of that
stuff was super fascinating to me so I
stuck with the Neuroscience because I
just wanted to learn something that was
really really interesting and cool that
not a lot of people have the opportunity
but I did decide just medicine medicine
and med school in general wasn't for me
I wasn't great at those classes and it
wasn't as interesting as I thought it
was in high school so that was kind of
what led me to Pivot there awesome I
think there's a lot of good stuff there
but basically my takeaway is you know
Life's Too Short if you don't love what
you're doing go do something else
especially in this day and age where you
know obviously transitioning to a
different career is always difficult I
don't think it's been easier than it has
been today than it has in the history of
the world right there's so many awesome
resources you know this podcast programs
I run YouTube other programs you know
there's so many good opportunities to
transition so if you're not happy like
let's transition so you did transition
let's talk about what your current title
and Company is right now and a little
bit about what you spend your time doing
today for awesome yeah I'll give you the
rundown so I'm a Solutions engineer at
Green Mountain technology basically the
short story is we help big customers
like Walmart Costco Ulta Microsoft any
of the big retailers that you know we
help them make decisions on their
packages
so those big companies they have
millions of different projects and
different things going on but we
specifically look at the shipments and
their packages and use their data to
help them solve problems okay that's
really interesting I like a couple
different things that you mentioned
there and I want to point some things
out to the listeners one your your title
right now is Solutions engineer now I
don't hear the word data in there I
don't hear the word analytics in there
but that doesn't mean that you're not
using those on a day-to-day basis right
yeah exactly and that was something that
it kind of Drew me away from this career
whenever I first was applying because of
like that isn't data analytics I I don't
really know what a Solutions engineer is
I haven't studied anything with
engineering I don't know what that means
and really the way my co-workers
describe it is we are there to engineer
a solution using data and there are you
know if that's something holding you
back if you're looking for jobs
something to keep in mind is there's so
many different titles and there's so
many different ways that companies might
word something that doesn't mean it's
not a data analyst or a data scientist
so kind of look into that and look at
really what the day-to-day looks like
because for me I saw okay we're working
with SQL a lot we are talking to
customers we're building dashboards like
that sounds like a data and I took a
chance on it and sure enough it's very
much in the same world and the same
realm that I was comfortable with it
just has a different title for sure that
that makes a lot of sense and I think
that's a really good thing for our
listeners to pick up on that really the
job that you want can always be
summarized in in two words and also the
two words that people use to describe
that job are going to be different from
from one place to another to be honest
it's just I don't know different
cultures different nomenclatures
different responsibilities you know like
some people are some data analysts will
be very SQL heavy some will be very you
know visualization heavy and for some
reason we can't all agree on this name
equals this is what you do when I when I
actually got my first job at Exxon Mobil
I was testing an optimization engineer
but you know every day I was programming
in Python I was using SQL I was making
machine learning and stuff like that and
it was like very very data Centric and
but the word data wasn't found in the
title at all okay so anyways I just love
that you have this this interesting and
interesting title absolutely now let's
talk about a little bit more of of what
your company does specifically and
obviously if you can't talk about
certain things that's that's totally
fine but it sounds like you're helping
these big companies choose their
packaging and their labeling and you're
using data to do that I mean obviously
don't say anything that you can't but
like just like what type of data is
involved in in labeling and these
consumer goods is it like purchasing
data is it like position data at the
store what type of data do you guys
typically use
yeah that's a great question so a lot of
the data that we're working with
shipments that they've already made so
the expected delivery date the zip codes
the price of the package the price of
all the additional fees like fuel you
never even think about all the extra
things that go into the price of just a
single package if you have to deliver it
to a house versus a business you're
going to charge an extra fee there's
going to be all of these different
little pieces and so our job is to help
them look at the data as a whole and
make some high level decisions and so
really we're we're consultants for these
people we're not really the decision
makers we're not really doing any of the
heavy lifting but we are just presenting
them with this idea that says hey you
know maybe UPS is giving you this much
discount versus FedEx is giving you this
much discount on X number of packages
let's go with FedEx for this year and
then you know that's something that they
can go back and decide but we're really
there to just help them
see those numbers and make educated
decisions with how their year of
shipments is going to go okay that's
interesting so a lot a lot of shipping
past shipping data that you're like
storing in like a database and basically
if someone wants to be like hey I need
to ship a bunch of this stuff from A to
B you could potentially go to the
database see who's kind of gone close
from A to B what those prices might be
you know what discounts might have been
applied and then make a recommendation
on what they might do that that makes a
lot of sense shipping is so fascinating
it's such a big it's such a big thing
right now just because I don't go to the
store right I I I only like order stuff
online even my groceries I don't go
grocery shopping anymore I only do I
only do delivery so anyway shipping is
just like a fascinating it's it's a
fascinating place to be so that that's
really cool now tell us a little bit
more about how you found this job was
this like a job you found online did you
know someone how did how did you find
this this job opening yeah so let me
kind of backtrack a little bit and tell
you the six months that led up to
finding this job so starting at about
February of 2022 I guess it's 20 23 now
2022. I just started doing what probably
most of you guys are doing just applying
to everything you can find on LinkedIn
if it says data in it I was applying and
I was really getting frustrated and
really getting upset because I was
getting either rejected to all of these
online applications or I was not hearing
anything back and that was super
frustrating and I was like I have a
strong resume I've done some projects
I've worked with data I've you know I've
have not really in any experience but
I've kind of done some of these projects
why am I not getting any response and I
quickly learned through following people
like Avery he talks about you know focus
on companies
and be very intentional with just a
handful of companies instead of just a
cold applying to thousands of them at a
time you're much more likely to land a
job and so after about six months of
doing that getting nowhere I decided
okay I'm gonna pivot I'm gonna change my
direction and really try to focus in on
just two or three companies my dad
actually works in the supply chain space
he's a Salesman and so he had some
connections and was like Hey you know
this company looks really good so I
reached out to them I applied I did some
research on the back end try to look at
their website actually landed an
interview and I went through four rounds
of interviews before I got rejected and
that was brutal and and the main
takeaway there is if you get an
interview and you're working on you know
you think you're gonna do it it looks
good just know that they're also looking
at other candidates so you are allowed
to look at other jobs don't count
anything off the table because it might
just go away just like like that but
after that experience I was like I
really have to double down on the
strategy so I picked three companies
that I thought looked good had kind of a
Vibe I wanted to work in was entry level
and I just did a ton of research on them
looked at their website read reports
yearly reports I would reach out to
people on LinkedIn that had the same
title as the job I was applying to and
so basically I found 10 to 15 people at
Green Mountain technology with the
solutions engineer title and I reached
out to him and I just said hey I'm
really interested in this position I
really want to hear from your
perspective what you do and just see if
this is a good fit for me and probably
of those 15 people at least eight of
them got on the phone with me let me
know talk me through some stuff it was
super helpful super cool environment so
by the time I even applied the HR person
was like oh we've we've heard your name
you're you've been coming up in
conversation we know you're you we know
you're knocking on our door so let's do
an interview
and sure enough I had so many people
vouching for me in the company by that
point that it was It was kind of easy to
get the job
that that is awesome I love so many
things about that and thank you for for
sharing that story what I what I really
love about it is you you were kind of
doing this method that I like to call
the spray and pray where you're like I'm
gonna easy apply to 100 LinkedIn jobs
today and usually I mean it's not always
a hard rule but usually spraying Pride
does not work very well and so you
narrow down your search you're like okay
I'm gonna just focus on Logistics right
now and then I love how you how you work
your way in with with the people that
had the current title at your company
you were going for so did you identify
the company first that that this this
company is an interesting company they
have an open role and then you found
people with that title is that right yes
exactly yeah okay and then what what
what type of message did you send
because you know I have a lot of
students inside of the data analytics
accelerator program right now and one
thing we're working on is called
messaging and how to send these types of
messages and it can be really scary to
be sending these cold messages and kind
of be asking for something right so what
type of messages did you send what is
something that you would you'd recommend
for other people to say
here I I pulled one up this is a actual
chat from a thread on LinkedIn this guy
is now my mentor at Green Mountain but
this was the first message I sent to him
on May 25th I said hey band I'd love to
chat with you about your role at GMT
I've been looking at the solutions
engineer position and it looks super
interesting
four like four hours later he's like hey
I'd love to chat are you available
Friday and that that was history and
then I just did that like 10 times and
so I until they everyone knew my name
that is awesome and very simple I think
that's something that you know people
can kind of Steal You know it's not you
didn't say anything complicated you kind
of got straight to the point but what's
obvious to me is that you had done your
research like you knew that there was a
role open you knew what the role was
called you knew that they had that same
role and I think doing that little bit
of extra homework can can go a really a
long way so so that's awesome so
basically you kind of landed this job
from
from networking really like that was a
big factor it was networking and that
was kind of a misconception that I had
going into is oh I have to draw on my
current Network like well I don't really
know anybody I don't have anyone
in the in this job I don't have anyone
in this career so instead of trying to
cultivate like my families and just
reach out to people and make that name
that Network right there on LinkedIn and
that was something that it was a little
bit scary but just sending a simple
message like that one of two things is
gonna happen either they say yes or they
say no and sometimes the yeses they
didn't want to get on a call they would
just be like well what do you want to
know and that's a little bit more
intimidating but then I would just like
go on their website find a few buzzwords
and be like oh I've heard that the
solutions engineer does this this and
this tell me about it and then just let
them talk that's that's that's really
neat I think there's a lot of good stuff
that that we can we can learn from that
keeping it simple you know not taking
rejection as they hate you it's just you
know they're busy and they have other
things they'd rather do doesn't mean
you're not good enough doesn't mean that
they hate you where all those cold
messages worth it like was was it worth
like the anxiety and the effort to do
all of that in the end absolutely so
worth it and something I'll add to that
just for anyone that's willing to to try
this method out two things are really
important to remember number one don't
spam don't like hit them up with 15
messages they'll get to it eventually
and if they don't try somebody else you
know these companies probably have 50 to
100 people at least try somebody else
secondly make sure your LinkedIn profile
looks like a real person have some
things that you're interested on there
talk about what you're passionate about
have your resume on there have it built
out so if they do choose to look into
your profile and they say you know I
want to get on this call I want to get
on a call with this person they look
cool so definitely build that out and
take some time to to build a presence on
your LinkedIn
yeah having a having a good LinkedIn can
be really impactful like oh wow this
person's kind of interesting and they
have an interesting story and they maybe
could really influence our our company I
think that I think that's awesome
now I at your your current position are
you mostly using SQL are you mostly
using Excel what's the tool that you're
using the most on a day-to-day basis I
would say SQL primarily and then Excel
for all of our dashboards and Reporting
we do a little bit of Tableau as well
but our company is a little bit more
freeform it's kind of like if the
customer has a question answer it
however you need to answer it present it
however you need to present it but it's
cool because they allow us to draw on
our own skill sets we have some people
who really lean into art who really lean
into Python and that's what they're good
at so that's that's how they're going to
present their data but for me I would
say SQL and Excel is primarily where I'm
standing
okay interesting so it almost sounds
like you are like a little mini
consultant for these companies and they
ask a question and you and you provide
them an answer and you can provide that
answer in any way that you want and so
you know you might have a SQL database
so it makes sense to use SQL but also
like even with a SQL database you could
use you could use some python stuff with
the SQL database and stuff like that so
it's really just a matter of of personal
preference which is kind of cool it goes
back to your title of like here's a
problem from the business my job as a
Solutions engineer is to engineer a
solution and a lot of those those
Solutions are going to be you know data
driven so I think I think that's
absolutely yep
okay the other thing I wanted to talk to
you about was just a little bit more
about about getting that job so you you
went through this whole process of the
spray and pray it didn't work very well
you know you you really what worked well
for you was finding this this company
with a lot of different solution
Engineers you saw the open open solution
engineer roll you reached out to all
those people by the time you actually
got to like the hiring manager or the
recruiter they're familiar with your
name which is awesome and then you said
it was kind of easy
did did you go through a lot of
interview processes or was it just did
they just like look at your resume did
you have to show a portfolio was the
interview process Behavioral or was
there some sort of like skill checked
walk us through that path a little bit
more yeah for sure so it was kind of
interesting because if you remember the
company I'd applied to before I went
through four rounds of interviews and
that company was they were really
interested in all of the individual
things on my resume like oh well when
did you do this and
November 2019 when did what was this and
they were very focused on the skills and
didn't really want to know me as a
person and what was so interesting is
when I went over to this other to Green
Mountain technology their interview was
person focused and I don't think we even
talked about my resume at all she's like
hey I looked at it it looks like you're
doing some good stuff I've and because
of the way that you've talked with all
these other Engineers they all can vouch
for you and they all know and they've
seen the projects that you've done
so I don't need to ask you about that I
want to know you as a person just seeing
the difference in how that was
approached made me automatically know
this is a much better company to be at
anyway I'm not even sad about the one
that I went through four rounds of
interviews for so with Green Mountain we
we did two interviews first one was just
very conversational just like this
getting to know my personality kind of
making sure I'm coachable I'm teachable
and that I'm willing and ready to learn
and then the next interview was a case
study presentation they gave me a big
data set and some very vague
instructions that basically said throw
together an analysis based on these this
data and that was it like there was no
Direction there was no anything and so
that was a little bit tough they gave me
a week to do that and it was a CSV file
with a hundred thousand rows just full
of shipping data and I should have done
it in SQL but the thing is at the time I
didn't really even know SQL I'd like
done a couple SQL projects and I knew
that that was their primary focus in the
company but I was like oh crap do I
either spend all my time learning how to
do SQL so I can prove that I can do it
or do I do it in a software I'm
comfortable with like Google Sheets and
then just provide a really really good
case study I ended up going with that
did it on Google Sheets it was slow it
crashed on me a hundred times but I was
able to use those numbers
and get to those conclusions a little
bit faster than taking the time to learn
SQL so when I ended up presenting this
case study they were like oh you know
are you I know that you did this in
Google Sheets are you capable of doing
it in SQL and I was like look I've
worked in SQL but right now at my
current place I'm not in a position to
use SQL to have gotten the accuracy and
the speed in which I did this I wanted
to present you an accurate and very well
done project I can learn SQL later and
immediately after this interview I'll be
taking a course and catching up on SQL
and they they really liked that that
that's awesome there's so many good
things there I wanna I wanna Branch off
of the first one being and I try to
preach this that your skills is probably
not the thing that's holding you back
from Landing a job the majority of the
time it's not the skills and in this
particular case I mean it sounds like
you didn't even really have the skill
that they really wanted but it's your
networking your perseverance your
personality I mean we can't all be like
Ace and have and have your your
traveling personality to to Winger away
thank you thank you but like
so amazing that you didn't even have to
know sequel to land that job it's it's
like so impactful it was just like you
know I I networked my way in my
personality was to the point where I
could kind of reach out to these people
they would kind of enjoy our
conversation see that I could learn see
that I was hard working and and build
from there it kind of goes back to
yesterday I was on kenji's podcast Ken's
nearest neighbors and one thing we
talked about is the stuff that you learn
in school isn't even the stuff you learn
on the job and so it's like it's like
you can't even really prepare for the
job because the stuff they teach you in
school is not the stuff they teach you
at the job so if you're gonna hire
someone No One's Gonna know what they're
actually doing until they start looking
there yeah so why not hire someone you
like so I like this company I like that
they did the case study with you I'm all
about case studies I think that's really
fascinating awesome thanks thanks for
sharing that with us there I want to
transition a little bit to a little bit
from that story is you know you took
this 100 000 in row CSV and you were
like all right I'm going to analyze this
and you chose Google Sheets as your your
weapon of choice yeah yeah that is bold
it's bold but you like it so that's
great and I want to talk a little bit
because you said it was crashing a lot
I've had a hundred thousand rows and
Google Sheets it does not go well it's
one of the downfalls of Google Sheets is
it doesn't handle big data extremely
well but I know you're a big Google
Sheets guy so I want you to to act act
like you're a Google Sheets missionary
here and and convince me and everyone
listening to why Google Sheets rocks I
want to hear people sheets absolutely
rocks for
I was going to give you a number but I'm
just going to start listing listing off
reasons number one it's absolutely
completely online Excel kind of has this
online thing a little bit with
SharePoint and Office 365 but Google
Sheets is instantly accessible it's been
fully online you can pick it up on your
phone you can pick it up on anybody's
device number two it's completely
compatible with collaboration you can
send it to anybody you can all do things
at the same time you can make edits you
can make changes you can send it in for
review number three it's a lot more user
friendly as someone who has since in the
last year I've learned both Google
Sheets and Excel to a pretty
intermediate to Advanced I love the way
that Google Sheets is laid out its
usability is a lot easier it's a lot
more like nice for people who just
aren't necessarily into Data if they
need to use a spreadsheet Google Sheets
is definitely the move and I could list
100 other reasons that that's awesome I
love those reasons I do love how
collaborative it is I do love how
accessible it is right like I I teach
excel in my analytics program and you
know not everyone has Excel on their
machine you know or you have an old
version of excel right now I'm paying
like seven bucks a month I think for
Excel on my computer and Google Sheets
is free so I'm paying nothing yep and
nothing's better than seven dollars at
seven dollars a month let me ask you
this is and yeah let me ask you this
have you seen people at you know in the
profession you know a Solutions engineer
or a data analyst using Google Sheets on
the job because obviously Google Sheets
is a great way to learn also if you know
Google Sheets you're going to figure out
Excel pretty easily but do you ever see
companies actually using Google Sheets
in kind of their Workforce or is that
something you haven't seen as much of so
at my company no Excel is pretty much
the standard Costco I can tell you that
Costco is 100 G Suite they use Google
Sheets for everything so it's funny
because we always have to convert their
files over to excel but yeah they're 100
using Google Drive and sheets in word
and everything so
okay yeah that's that's really
interesting so like for instance if
there was a Costco data analyst they
might be working in in Google Sheets I'm
assuming Google works in Google Sheets I
would hope so right like some of those
roles they'd have to be using Google
Sheets so I don't see it listed too
often as like a requirement and once
again if you know Google Sheets you know
Excel if you know Excel you know Google
Sheets I mean it's not exactly a
one-to-one but it's it's pretty similar
for sure and I think part of the
argument like a lot of people argue okay
Excel is a lot better because it can
handle more data it has more features
and functions and formulas and I will
say that Google Sheets is it's keeping
up in the race it's just expanded to be
able to handle about a million rows
they're adding new formulas and
functions constantly to keep up so you
know if you're not doing anything insane
Google Sheets can cover pretty much
everything you need to do and even in my
job even in my like professional
environment I don't really see anyone
doing any anything and I would not be
capable in Google Sheets so it's like
yeah to some degree Excel is probably
more powerful
but even in my job is everything that's
going on
there's nothing you couldn't do without
with Google Sheets so awesome that's
yeah I I think I think that's a a good a
good summary synopsis of all of it and
one thing I wanted to tell you guys
listeners is one thing that's really
cool is is Ace is actually doing a
Google Sheets course that I think would
be good for people wanting to get into
Data but also just people who are like
who use data tangentially at their job
like if they're accountants or I don't
know Engineers stuff like that I think
it could be really good so he has a wait
list for that and I'll put the link in
the description in the show notes down
below but Ace if you want to take a
couple a couple seconds and explain a
little bit about what you're doing yeah
absolutely so I'm building three
separate Google Sheets courses a very
beginner like you've never even touched
a spreadsheet in your life kind of an
intermediate we're getting into some
formulas and functions some tables pivot
tables stuff like that and then I don't
even call it Advanced but just like
intermediate plus right just a little
bit more doing vlookups doing X lookups
some of those a little bit more
challenging functions that's what I'm
working on right now doing three
separate courses I'll kind of package it
as one if people want to just get all of
it at once or do each individual course
but right now I'm just working on the
completely basic course so I'm launching
a beta in probably about a week and I
need people to get on take the beginner
course give me some feedback and it's
just going to be very short like 11 or
12 videos shouldn't take more than two
hours but I really just need some
feedback to see it might go in the right
direction am I teaching you all some
things that you think you'd want to know
even if you're a beginner or if you're a
little bit more advanced and kind of
putting yourself in their shoes so
that's what I'm doing right now and the
link that Avery's going to provide is is
the sign up sheet to that beta course
awesome so you guys can check that out
in the show notes down below I hope you
enjoyed that episode and if you did I'm
gonna have an awesome free masterclass
that I know you're going to love we're
going to talk about a lot of things this
episode talked about you can get it
absolutely for free at
datacrejumpster.com training or using
the link in the show notes down below
hope to see you there

Title: What Do Americans Google? (Data Science Project)

Description: Try this project out with Deepnote üëâ https://deepnote.com/workspace/averydata-36f64445-580d-463f-96ef-7bb22d675e31/project/Google-Trends-f180fb7f-5ccc-4654-9c85-b815058b84df/%2FNotebook%201.ipynb

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).

In this video, we create a project to find out what every single US state is Googling every hour. With the help of Deepnote, we were able to call the Google API every hour & store that data in an integrated Google Drive CSV file. Then we stitched all the images into an animated data visualization. 

This project was made entirely in Python.

This project is open-source! You can try this project yourself & add to it directly with Deepnote. Ideally, we'd have better color management so that if the state has the same topic of interest from one hour to another, the color would not change. Simply duplicate the project & try working on your own!

Subscribe to my channel if you love data!

Video Transcript:
have you ever wondered what do Americans
Google the most like what are they
actually searching for for example Flint
here from Cloudy with a Chance of
Meatballs what is he Googling or this
random stock image guy what is he
Googling or how about the entire State
of Florida well in today's video I'm on
a quest to find out what every state is
Googling every hour and I'm going to
conquer this quest with the help of data
science and by the end we'll be able to
create an awesome animation just like
this that shows what every state is
Googling every single hour and that'll
help us answer cool questions like what
was the state of Kentucky the only state
that starts with a K thinking about on
November 14th at 10 pm the answer Days
of Our Lives so before I show you the
finished product let me explain how I
built this it all started when I first
saw this visualization from V1 analytics
that basically did the exact same thing
it took the top trending searches per
day for all 50 states and my mind was
blown I was like this is one of the
coolest vision realizations I've ever
seen it tells such a cool story I gotta
do this I gotta do something very cool
like this only one problem it's really
hard to do this let's talk about why
Google does not hand out this data for
free it considers our searches its
product and so it doesn't really want us
to know what everyone is searching it
keeps that proprietary they're not just
gonna give us this information it's not
on kaggle so we have to scrape this data
ourselves so if you remember Elementary
School you know that there is 50 states
in the United States and that there is
365 days in a year so that is the total
number of searches we would need if we
did daily searches but I want to do a
little twist up I want to do hourly
searches so we multiply that by 24 and
that would mean that we would need 438
000 different data points but Google
doesn't store any of this data for us so
we have to make those calls in The Hour
That means every hour we have to call
Google 50 times and figure out what term
is searched the most in each state we
then take that information populate it
into a database take the information
from the day database and make one graph
at a time and then take the combination
of those graphs and Stitch one by one by
one to turn it into a beautiful
animation and then we'll finally have
the final product and honestly that is a
lot of moving Parts because every hour
on the hour you need to call Google 50
times once for each state and ask what
the top search term was from that
particular State then you need to store
that information in some sort of a
database where you can access it later
to create these types of graphs of maps
that basically have a different color
for each particular term and each term
printed on the state you need to create
all of those different images and save
them in another database where they can
be multiples put together that
eventually goes into a final animation
and that's really difficult in three
particular places that I have
represented with putting stars here the
first one is to schedule on the hour
every hour to get those 50 calls from
Google that is difficult to do next to
take that information from Google and
store inside of a database that's hard
to do and third it's hard to create all
the different images and store them
somewhere automatically so previously I
was pretty stuck on where those stars
are but luckily with the help of today's
sponsored deep note I was able to
overcome those obstacles and create this
awesome animation deepnote is like a
collaborative Jupiter notebook inside of
the cloud and I can type all of my
python inside of there so I actually
made this whole script and this whole
project inside of deep Dome and to solve
that first star issue I'm able to run
the notebook on a scheduled basis so
basically you can see right now that
I've set this notebook to run
automatically in the cloud at an hourly
basis and you can do that hourly you
could do that daily you could do that
Weekly at different minutes and have it
all run automatically for you and even
notify you by email if you have
successful run or an unsuccessful run so
that you don't even have to come back
and see what happened so great we're
able to do our 50 Google calls every
single minute but we still need to store
that data somewhere that's the next
great part about deep note that helped
me with this solution is that it can
integrate with Google will drive and so
I actually just have a big CSV inside of
Google Drive that I update every hour
and I add the 50 new state lists to the
bottom and I just have a giant database
inside of Google Drive that I'm able to
call upon whenever I want seamlessly
with the use of deep note so two
problems down we are able to now
schedule it every hour and we're able to
save our data inside of the big CSV
inside of Google Drive we still need
somewhere to save these images that
we're generating inside of deep note and
once again the Integrations come to the
rescue because I'm just going to use
Google Drive again so every time that I
actually make one of these Maps or these
graphs I actually save it straight
inside of my my Google Drive and I'm
able to access all of the images
straight from there so you can see how
useful deep note is and it's solving all
three of my problems that I had with
this initially so let's go ahead and
check out the final product and here's
the coolest part is you can actually
remake this on your own as well with the
link in the description down below so as
you can see the time moves pretty
quickly so feel free to press pause at
any time to actually see what's going on
a given date and a given day time that
you see that we have Real Madrid right
now the Nets the Astros a lot of these
are going to be sports themed it's
incredible Billy eilish pops up Arizona
Cardinals is just in Arizona the Saints
pop up a lot of football a lot of Taylor
Swift going on lots of Lakers people
love to search about the Lakers they're
having a terrible season in the NBA so
there's a lot of Buzz about them then
you have the Warriors more NBA teams the
Trailblazers the Miami Heat College
Football Saturday so Clemson LSU uscla
all those and then UFC popped up for
that for a second the Cavs Russell
Wilson Dallas Cowboys it's mostly Sports
it's actually incredible how much
America cares about sports because look
at the Cowboys the Utah Jazz go Jazz my
local Jazz the Warriors the Patriots uh
the Powerball that Lottery happened
right so everyone was searching about
that there was an earthquake on the west
coast that people were interested in
meta stock there was the layoffs and all
right crazy stuff going on more
Powerball more Warriors more Warriors
more Warriors World Series not even
close to oh there we go there's the
World Series back to the Lakers it only
was there for a second it we have Penn
State football up here only in
Pennsylvania the Powerball numbers take
over the Broncos this is Sunday so you
got a lot of NFL games going on the
Vikings the Broncos the Eagles then
we're looking at Pumpkin we're on
Halloween we're watching the Lakers play
Bengals over here take off Philly Steve
Nash uh Taylor Swift Phillies A
Christmas Story I don't know why Donald
Trump I don't know why more Donald Trump
bed rake height Day of the Dead PSG Day
of the Dead Day of the Dead Day of the
Dead Pelican Zion Williams how do I vote
that was like for like three hours
people were Googling that that's it
um I guess it's the time that matters
right lots of eagles lots of Jeff Bezos
weather radar and Apple TV I'm not
exactly sure why there was a tornado
warning right here manifest just came
out on Netflix I'm watching that right
now I'm really liking it daylight
savings more Powerball Powerball BYU
football that was kind of fun for me and
Utah Bengals Bengals Bengals Chiefs
Packers Veterans Day meta Utah Jazz
Veterans Day Veterans Day Veterans Day
good I'm glad we're prioritizing our
veterans Ravens Lotto Chris Evans Chris
Evans FTX Brittany Greiner Fox Griner
Bernie Greiner the crown Miranda Lambert
Alan Jackson Nick Cannon just had
another kid lots of kids for Nick Cannon
Jake Paul Veterans Day black panther
black panther black panther Real Madrid
Veterans Day Veterans Day student loan
forgiveness I gotta check that out I
guess student love forgiveness Gallagher
I don't even know what that is maybe
someone can tell me what Gallagher is
down below in the comments Formula One
Liverpool got some Arsenal got some UFC
going on in the middle of the night I
bet yep
um or the middle of the day sorry on a
Saturday Seahawks Seahawks Chiefs
Steelers Cowboys 49ers more NFL football
more NFL football more and Sylvester
Stallone Pete Davidson don't know why
Raiders Pete Davidson Eagles Eagles
Eagles Fly Eagles Fly fought Taylor
Swift that's what's going on in my house
right now trying to get Taylor Swift
tickets and lots of trump because he
just announced uh presidency for 2024
the Knicks and we're done now here's the
coolest thing is we're going to open
source this project so if you click the
link in the description down below
that'll open up the actual notebook that
I used to do all of this and you can
click duplicate it and have it in your
very own deep note instance and just
like a snap and the reason we did this
was so that you guys can take this and
make it better I know it's not perfect
one of the things I would like to change
is you can see how from one to another
hour that the color changes even if the
topic or the hottest Trend does not
change so I'd love to actually Implement
some code that fixes that problem
basically we just need to keep track of
it in the database and keep track of
what color it is and if that color
already exists to use that particular
color but I didn't have time to do that
so you guys can do that and take this
whole project and add whatever twist
that you want to it and I'm really
excited to see what you guys come up
with thanks for watching subscribe for
more videos bye

Title: Discovering The Data Science Project King by Webscraping YouTube

Description: In this video, I webscrape YouTube data to find out who the true Data Science Project King is & how I can catch up to them.

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).

Check out Bright Data üëâ https://brightdata.grsm.io/avery
Watch The Iron Analyst üëâ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QNOyxX2o3tU&t=1s
Scraping Amazon Data üëâ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vSMYoLyKTY8

Video Transcript:
I am on a mission to become the best
data analytics project YouTuber on
planet Earth but there's only one
problem there is some Fierce competition
and I have mortal enemies like Luke
Bruce Alex analyst and Kenji who stand
in my way to becoming the data science
project King my goal is to overtake them
and become the most popular data project
YouTuber there possibly can be but I
think there might even be other data
project YouTubers that don't even know
about it how am I supposed to overtake
and defeat these different YouTubers and
I don't know who they are and how far
away I am from them in terms of
subscribers and Views and then I
realized I know how to data science
data science can help me solve this
problem I realized I could web scrape
YouTube and pull the best YouTubers on
the topic of data science projects I
could see all their stats see how many
views they have see how many subscribers
they have and basically get some extra
data like when they started their
Channel How fast they're growing stuff
like that and I can clean all that data
up and create a cool visualization
showing who the true data science
project King is smart huh and it
shouldn't be too hard should be pretty
fun so I set out to work
but guys only one big problem that is
that web scraping YouTube is actually
pretty difficult their code is very
Dynamic it's changing and it's hard to
parse and for the day that I need for
this particular task I would have to
collect all my competitors Channel URLs
from a YouTube search results page which
is hard then extract the relevant data
from their individual Pages which is
hard this is basically a similar way to
using selenium or beautiful soup and
gosh dang I just don't have time for
this I know my data enemies are already
three steps ahead of me ah I'm just
stressed so my plan was done for I Was
Defeated and I was sad I had no chance
of defeating my YouTube Project foes and
becoming the YouTube Project King if I
didn't even know who my foes were and
how far behind I was in terms of views
and subscribers and I was totally ready
to give up entirely that was until
today's sponsor bright data reached out
to me and asked if they could help
bright data is the world's number one
web data platform and one of the things
they do best is web script they have
hundreds of international IP addresses
and seasoned web scraper Engineers that
make web scraping really easy the only
web scrape data that's publicly
available so it's as if you paid a human
to go out and do all this research for
you and record all this data and then
give it to you except it goes way faster
it's way more reliable and it's just
flat out easier so I logged into my
bright data account and found the data
collector section a data collector is
basically exactly what it sounds like
it's a crawler used to collect data at
scale and the cool thing about bright
data is they have a bunch of pre-built
crawlers ready for you including
scrapers for Instagram Zillow Amazon
indeed and you can actually see a video
that I did where I scraped Amazon data
and tried to come up with a cool product
idea in this video right here with the
indeed data you can actually watch me
use the actual scraper and then lose to
another one of my enemies
shashankalanathy in the iron analyst you
can see that video right here obviously
if I was going to know who my biggest
data project YouTuber foes were I needed
to use the YouTube crawler and just with
one button bam the crawler was built and
ready for me to adapt and use all I had
to do was plug in my search term which
was data science project and hit run the
first crawler stage does a search on
YouTube for that specific querying topic
and pulls out a list of relevant YouTube
channels then it feeds that results to
the second crawler stage where it takes
that list of YouTubers and pulls their
stats like views subscribers Etc and
within a few minutes I had a full list
of my data project YouTube enemies but
the good part is I didn't have to code
any of it and this meant I could just
focus on making good insights from the
data and not focusing on collecting it
but also for anyone who has web scraped
before you know it's super easy to get
blocked and bright data just takes care
of that for me I don't have to worry
about it which is super awesome and it
just makes life so much easier now note
that I'm using this particular data set
and this particular web crawler to be
able to figure out who the data science
project King is but you could use this
data set for a whole different variety
of things you can see you know who the
top YouTubers in different categories
you can try to figure out certain people
you want to work with if if you're in
branding and Affiliates you can find
different partners you can just do a
bunch of different business applications
with this awesome tool and if you guys
want to go ahead and check out bright
data I'll have a link in the description
down below now this data came to me as a
Json file which stands for JavaScript
object notation file but it can easily
be converted to a CSV which is comma
separated value file pretty easily so
you guys want to watch me do that with
just the snap of my fingers ready three
two one
okay just kidding what do you guys think
I used a python script do you think I'm
just magic and I can do that type of
stuff with the snap of my fingers y'all
crazy so after cleaning up my data a
little bit I was able to create a list
of each YouTuber their subscriber counts
and their view count so here's the code
that I used to do that you can pause the
video if you want to check it out now
came the moment of truth it was time to
find out who my biggest enemies are and
how far behind them I actually was I was
nervous I was scared but I was also
excited knowing that with this knowledge
I could work harder I could work faster
I could work stronger to become the data
project YouTube King and here are the
results I created this scatter plot that
basically shows the view count as the
x-axis and the subscriber count as the
y-axis and each one of these different
dots is a YouTuber and you can see that
I'm down here in the bottom left-hand
Corner low on subscribers and low on
viewers indeed my hypothesis was correct
I have a lot of different enemies a lot
of different foes that'll have to take
down and overtake in this YouTube data
science king battle people like I
thought Luke Bruce Alex the analyst and
Kenji r d on the list but there's
actually quite a bit more I didn't think
about Tina Huang I didn't think about
Sundance I didn't think about Shashank I
didn't think about Keith Galley I have a
lot of catching up to do because they're
all behind programming with mosh and
code Basics so it turns out I have quite
a bit of ways before I take the data
project Youtube Crown but you guys can
help me out in this journey by going
below and pressing that subscribe button
or watching one of these two videos
right here I think that we can do this
together if you guys are willing to help
me out thank you

Title: Top Courses to Become a Self-Taught Data Scientist

Description: In this video, I walk you through 5 courses from Coursera that can help you become a self-taught data scientist / analyst üëá (links below)

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).

Google Data Analytics Certificate üëâ https://imp.i384100.net/NK7qKV
Data Visualization with Tableau üëâ https://imp.i384100.net/9W0YW5
Data Science Fundamentals with Python and SQL üëâ https://imp.i384100.net/MX7LXq
Applied Data Science üëâ https://imp.i384100.net/Ke7NeN
Machine Learning Engineering for Production üëâ https://imp.i384100.net/7mzNmg

Timestamps
0:00 - Introduction
0:34 - My Self Taught Data Scientist Story
2:21 - Google Analytics Certificate 
2:55 - Data Visualization with Tableau
3:29 - Data Science Fundamentals with Python & SQL
4:11 - Applied Data Science
4:39 - Machine Learning Engineering for Production (MLOps)


#datascience #machinelearning #DataAnalysis #DataAnalyst #DataScientist #dataanalytics

Video Transcript:
the self-taught data scientist it's a
phrase you're starting to hear more and
more of but what does it even really
mean like what actually is it and how
can you become a self-taught data
scientist or a self-taught data analyst
well in today's video I'll share my
story to becoming a self-taught data
scientist and give you five actionable
courses that you can take today that
will help you on this journey as always
I hope you find this video really
helpful in your data journey and if you
feel like it is helpful please hit
subscribe as I'm trying to catch up and
become the most subscribed to Avery on
YouTube I'm trying to take Avery
Dennison right now and you can see him a
little bit away so I can use your help
so it's actually kind of interesting
that I even consider myself a
self-taught data scientist because I
actually have a master's degree but let
me rewind many of you know that in 2015
I worked as a chemical lab technician I
wore a white coat I wore goggles I wore
gloves and I mixed really dangerous
chemicals and I ran these experiments
and these experiments were so long and I
didn't love it while I was there I met
the data scientist on the team and he
explained what he did and I was so
intrigued I'd watch his fingers on the
keyboard as he made amazing graphs and
Analysis of the experiments I was making
and he ended up actually quitting and we
tried to hire another data scientist for
months and months and months and we just
we couldn't find one so finally I got
sick of it and I decided I would become
the data scientist now I'd taken no data
courses I could only program in Matlab
and I had no idea what I was doing but
over the next few weeks I checked out
tons of books from the library about
data and read through every single one I
found every single blog article I could
find I was spending hours I watched
these really old Andrew ing lectures on
machine learning from Stanford Oh no
just about a week ago I had my car
service the audio in the video was
terrible and eventually after all this
learning I really started to to do data
science for this company it was awesome
so I was a self-taught data scientist
but was I I mean I read all these books
and I read all these blogs and watched
all these videos it wasn't really
self-taught I used the resources I had
access to but my resources they weren't
that great old dusty textbooks old fuzzy
video lectures but luckily for you you
don't have to suffer as much as I did on
your journey become a self-taught data
scientist because of today's sponsor
Coursera Coursera is an online course
provider with dozens of data science and
analytics courses and here are the top
five courses that I would recommend to
you if you want to be a self-taught data
scientist or analyst and by the way I'll
have a link to each of these in the show
notes down below so number one is the
Google data analytics certificate and it
seems like everyone's taking this right
now in my mind this certification
carries the most weight with employers
not only will you learn to be learning
the basics of all things data analytics
but it'll also look good on your resume
and in this eight part course you'll
cover things like spreadsheet SQL or
Tableau and even get the chance to do a
Capstone project at the end it is
designed to take around six months and
is 100 self-paced so you're free to go
as fast or as slow as you want this is
the one certification that I've seen
people with no college degree land jobs
with so it's definitely worth checking
out if you want something a little bit
more specific course number two might be
for you which is data visualization with
Tableau now I I love Tableau in my mind
Tableau is the best Roi return on
investment that you can have when you're
starting your Jada Journey why because
Tableau is just so easy to learn and you
can do so much with it so my advice is
actually get really good at Tableau Data
visualization is such an underrated
skill and getting good at it looks so
impressive on your resume and doesn't
take all that much time by the end of
this course you'll be able to make
powerful visualizations reports and
dashboards that help business people
make important decisions but if you want
something a little bit more coding heavy
try course number three that is data
science fundamentals with python and SQL
specialization SQL and python are going
to be your bread and butter in your data
Journey so the more comfortable you feel
with these the better they're going to
be required for nearly every job that
you apply for and this one's actually
offered by IBM who is a trusted brand
name in the space so by the end you'll
feel comfortable working with python
Library such as pandas numpy and also
feel confident with SQL select filtering
and join statements honestly you can
never mask after all of python and you
can never master all of SQL so it's
always good to get the foundations to
just keep learning keep learning keep
learning and now that you've done those
basic courses let's move designed a
little bit more applied and that is
applied data science this is one that's
actually from the University of Michigan
which is another great program and I
love the fact that they use the word
applied it's important to learn the
basics of course but you'll never retain
them in your head unless you start to
actually use them in this course you'll
start to flex your analyst muscles and
practice what you've been learning
you'll be doing more real world
realistic exercises which cements that
learning in your brain and gives you
confidence that you can become a data
scientist like I said you haven't truly
learned something until you have used it
in the last course I want to talk about
is a little bit more advanced but it
could really help you stand out and that
is machine learning engineering for
production ml Ops basically ml machine
learning Ops operations once again a
caveat this one is really important only
important if you're trying to become a
data scientist data analyst you're not
doing so much with ml in general so I'm
recommending this one because ml Ops is
becoming bigger and bigger and a hotter
and hotter topic and it's really like a
current buzzword right now in the data
space and with that comes a large demand
for that skill set and honestly there's
not a lot of people that have that skill
set so there's kind of like a people Gap
that you can fill There's an opportunity
for you to come in develop these MLF
skills and find great high-paying jobs
quickly and efficient so this could be a
great opportunity for you to learn
something that launches your career
there you have it five courses from
chrysera that you can take today that
will help you on your data journey to
become a self-taught data analyst or
self-taught data scientist I'll have
links to all those courses down below if
you want to continue your data learning
I suggest with my maybe one of these two
videos right here see you guys later bye

Title: 5 Quick & Easy Secrets To Make Your First Data Project‚Ä¶in 30 days or less

Description: In this short, live webinar, I‚Äôll give you five tips that will help you create your first data science project. These tips are how I was able to build 30 data science projects in 30 days.

By the end of this session, you should have a much clearer direction on how to get started & actually publish your project.

Video Transcript:
okay I think we're on are we on guys
hello please if you can see me in the
chat let me know because I am not sure
that this is working to be honest so uh
let me know in the chat if you can see
me if you can welcome I'm so excited to
be here
um we're going to uh be getting started
in just a few minutes sorry I'm a little
bit late had some technical difficulties
but let me make sure that all you guys
can see me and all you guys can hear me
let's take a look
[Music]
um
okay let's see I'm still not seeing
anything yet from any of y'all oh we got
people here what's up okay great uh we
got Genesis we got Moxie we got kjz
what's up you guys how are you doing
welcome to uh this session I'm excited
to uh be here with you uh okay
everything looks good you guys can hear
me sweet awesome this is great uh will
this be recorded yes but it's more fun
live so if you can be here live be here
live give me one second I'm gonna get
this light on
I'm so stoked you guys thanks for being
here my name is Avery Smith if you did
not know and we're going to get started
okay perfect so hopefully you guys are
in uh the webinar okay we're gonna get
started you have the chat on the right
hand side please be active we're going
to be using the chat a lot today all
right sound good everybody if you can
hear me loudly and clearly please say
yes in the chat this is going to be
interactive you guys so I'm gonna have
you be talking a lot in the chat so uh
make sure you're you're ready to rumble
um okay give me one minute okay great
awesome so let's see
um if you are here and you can hear me
and you're watching give me that yes in
the chat
um say yes just because I want to see
who is here and how long the delay is
uh okay perfect so
um all right we got lots of yeses
awesome you guys this is fantastic okay
so hopefully you guys can see me
um if you are uh watching right now also
tell me where you're watching from
comment where you're watching from I
personally and in Linden Utah okay so uh
comment where you're watching from I
want to know where all you guys are from
so hi David hi sapna hi cats hi Kella hi
to buzzo hi dabada hi zaheed awesome you
guys this is great
so
um where are you watching from I want to
know let me know where you guys are
watching from once again I'm in Linden
Utah and you are here for this awesome
webinar where I'm going to expose my top
five secrets about how to make uh
projects okay so awesome we got Genesis
from St Louis we got uh German from
Colombia zahid from Florida from India
Kuwait we got lore from Seattle Toronto
London Michigan Seattle Greensboro hi
Corey what's up good to see you here
Cars one of my students shout out to
Kari Sam from Nigeria Sean from Seattle
Han from Orlando geez we got a lot of
people on this all right thank you guys
for joining once again
um my name is Avery Smith I'm going to
be kind of explaining what how to build
data science projects over the next like
half hour 45 minutes or so
um but please be interactive I can see
the chat be talking to me on chat don't
make this boring I teach data science in
a fun way and part of fun is being a
community talking together so be as
active as you can on the chat alright if
you agree with me and you want to be
active on the chat say yes and let's get
this show on the road so once again be
interactive type on chat I'm going to be
talking to you guys a lot uh we already
talked about where you're watching from
if there's only one thing that I hope
that each and every one of you guys get
from this webinar it's this okay
projects are the cheat code for landing
your next data job it's like it's almost
like when you go to a website you type
in a coupon code and it gives you a
discount or like when you're in a video
game and you like type in a a code and
it unlocks the whole video game like
this next level like you have super
powers in the video game projects are
that for your data career it's like a
video game you type in projects and Bam
all of a sudden you have new super
powers you're ready to get that land
land your dream job this is the secret
code okay that's the one thing if you
guys stop watching right now it's fine
but trust me you're not going to want to
stop watching but if you did this is the
one thing I hope you take away from this
all right it is your one project away
from a promotion you're one project away
from your next job you're one project
away from shedding that imposter
syndrome and feeling good about who you
are and who you are in your data career
okay if you want those things if you're
excited about this if you want to know
about these cheat codes give me a yes in
the chat alright I love you guys you
guys are being so active in the chat
this is so fun okay so here's what I'm
going to give you okay in the next like
I said 40 minutes or so I'm gonna give
you five actionable steps that you can
take today to become what I call a
project Builder someone who builds
projects in the data science and
analytics space okay you guys cool with
that if I give you these five actionable
steps is that something you want if it
is please let me know go ahead and type
yes inside of the chat all right sweet
this is great you guys we have a lot of
people here we're having a lot of fun
okay next
oops sorry I went backwards next here's
another reason to stay to the end okay
at the end of this presentation I'll be
giving away a 25 Amazon gift card
um at the very end it'll be the last
thing we do
um so just to get back to you guys and
the community for being here uh you guys
can spend on whatever you want but I
would love for you guys to spend it on
like a data book or maybe spend it on
someone else but you can spend it on
yourself too
if you guys are interested in the
giveaway please let me know with the
word giveaway right now okay I'm not
doing the giveaway right now it'll be at
the end of the video
um but but let me know all right and if
you guys are interested okay let's sync
let's think
um
okay great okay some people said that
they cannot access the chat yeah that is
kind of hard if you can't access the
chat that's no problem if you can't
access the chat just just just be with
you me and here in spirit all right uh
it's more fun with chat but it's okay if
not
um you can if you really want the chat
you can potentially go to the YouTube
this is on YouTube
um right now but uh there's a reason why
you don't want to go there so maybe
don't go there all right anyways all
right so it seems like you guys are
interested in the giveaway great
um but I'm gonna just ask you guys
please I'm gonna be here for a half hour
40 minutes please be focused like I I
feel like this is a really good
opportunity for you guys to learn about
projects and portfolios you know close
Facebook if you're watching Netflix
close Netflix just give me your
undivided attention for a half hour okay
um great
sweet
um let's see okay I just see some things
in the chat if you can't access the chat
you need to create a channel giveaway
you'll be able to access this on YouTube
open in YouTube instead of a browser all
that good stuff
um okay
interesting all right we're gonna look
at that but if you guys didn't know who
I am my name is Avery Smith I used to be
a chemical lab technician so this is a
picture of me uh in 2015 I think look at
me I'm in the lab I got my goggles on
looking kind of like a nerd I got my
white coat you guys think I look nerdy
here I think I kind of look nerdy here
huh uh anyways kind of kind of
interesting I was a chemical app
technician so I was dealing with
chemicals I was dealing with sulfur
dioxide I was dealing with really cost
what's the word caustic uh metals and
acids every day I had to go into work I
had to be in the lab I had to wear
protective gloves one day I was actually
working in there working on new
experiment and I opened up
um this like I don't know exactly what
you would call it it's basically like a
tonic
um and I ended up spilling it on myself
and I got this my skin started to burn I
had to rush to the bathroom wash my
hands as fast as I could and man it left
this burn I had this acid burn on my
hand and it sucked okay sucks so bad and
fast forward to now I'm a data scientist
I work from home you know uh I make over
six figures I get to do cool things I
don't have to go into work and life is
good so that is my story of how I went
from a chemical lab technician to data
scientist but part of the key was my
projects and my portfolios okay
um so a little bit more about who I am
and what exactly I do now so um right
now I spend most of my time helping
people break into the field of data
science and analytics I do that through
my program called Data career jumpstart
and I've literally helped hundreds of
people learn data science and analytics
I also helped teach data at MIT that's
Massachusetts The Institute of it's
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
okay pretty big tech school to be honest
I also run a data consulting firm where
I do
uh analytics and Consulting for
fortunate 500 clients I used to be a
data scientist at Exxon Mobil which is a
huge oil and gas company one of the
biggest companies in the world
and most recently I built 30 data
science projects in 30 days how many of
you guys saw that on YouTube if you saw
that on YouTube put me in the chat that
was something that no other data
scientist has done before and basically
over the span of what month was that
August
um right
yeah mostly August uh I built a project
every single day and posted on YouTube
with with like a tutorial about how to
do everything so that's a little bit
more about me
um hopefully you guys have met me before
but if not that's a good introduction
but I want you guys to be able to
imagine this okay so can you imagine
let's say you built these cool projects
you built a cool portfolio can you
imagine having something that looks like
this being able to show this to
recruiters being able to show this to
hiring manage manager showing them hey
look at here's eight different projects
I did oh you're an engineering company
here here's an engineering project I did
oh you're a media company look at this
project I did on Netflix oh you're a
sports company hey well why don't you
guys look at this cool project I did on
NBA player tracking and you know NBA
shot analysis oh you're you know Twitter
look at this cool thing I did where I
analyzed a bunch of tweets imagine being
able to show recruiters and hiring
managers a portfolio of amazing data
science projects that you made how would
you feel
what what emotions would you have like
would you feel confident would you feel
happy would you feel sad would you feel
excited
um tell me what type of like emotions
that you guys would have if you guys had
a portfolio like this okay
let me know in the chat
what if you got a message from a hiring
manager that looks like this hey we got
your application and saw your project do
you have any more yes I have a whole
bunch of them just go to averyjsmith.com
to view them all wow this is awesome
we're working on similar things at our
company for instance Facebook and we
think you'd be a great match would you
be interested in interviewing yeah for
sure awesome if you send we'll send over
an email with some information okay now
this is a fake chat sorry excuse me this
is obviously fake I made this right but
what is not fake is this ready are you
guys ready for this
this is what I got I'm gonna move myself
a little bit smaller here so you can see
a little bit but here's a message
impressive background would love to
connect data science opportunity data
scientist permanent Amazon hiring data
engineer data science opportunity remote
data engineer and architect uh this is
from Amazon this is from Amazon some of
these are from Facebook some of these
are from Blackstone one of the biggest
hedge funds in the world uh anyways I
got literally guys dozens and dozens and
dozens of messages because of how my
portfolio was and so when you guys you
know said not too long ago about like
imagining how you'd feel with this a lot
of you guys had stoked confident uh
accomplished you know that's how I felt
when I started getting all these and I'm
not telling you guys I'm not telling you
this to brag you know I'm not showing
you guys this to brag I'm trying to show
you what's possible and how this this
projects and portfolios can become a
cheat code you guys have something that
you know you can show recruiters you
have stuff that you can show people on
Amazon
or sorry on LinkedIn you start to get
people like Amazon reaching out to you
okay and there's nothing special about
me guys I'm exactly who you were
remember not too long ago I'm a freaking
chemical lab technician I I studied
chemical engineering in college I used
to wear goggles I used to have a white
coat and stuff like that but now
I was getting this and the biggest
reason why is because I was doing cool
projects and talking about them okay how
would that affect your life if you guys
had those you know those messages coming
in how would that affect your life how
would that make you feel let me know in
the chat uh hopefully I'm imagining it
would make you feel good you'd be stoked
you'd hopefully Land one of those jobs
and take it and run with it right
um that's how I felt okay
so uh basically over the next half hour
or so I'm gonna kind of explain how you
can do this even if you don't
necessarily have a ton of experience
okay so this is one of my favorite well
I guess I kind of hate it too
um
I kind of hate this circle but how many
of you guys have felt this circle before
if you have felt the circle before
please put a me in the chat okay what
the circle says it's a cycle it says I
can't get a job because I don't have
experience
because I can't get a job because I
don't have experience and that's some of
the problem that you guys might have
right is is you're like oh I want this
data job I want I want to raise I want I
want an upgrade I want to work from home
I want to be in the tech space but I
can't land a job because I don't have
experience
but I can't get experience because I
can't get a job and it's like this
never-ending cycle of like chicken or
the egg like what's going on like like
oh my gosh how do I actually freaking do
this do you guys want to know my
solution to solving this if you guys
want to know the solution to solving
this please let me know in the chat okay
um just just say like yes or something I
don't know say something go crazy in the
chat if you guys want to know my
solution to solving this okay I see a
lot of people saying I feel like this me
me still feeling this way I see this
every day all this good stuff okay
you guys ready here is my solution to
feeling this way
projects that is how you break the cycle
you break it with projects because with
projects you're creating your own
experience okay you're creating you're
manufacturing your own experience
um I actually wasn't even planning on
doing this but let me show you guys
something really quick okay let me show
you guys something really quick
foreign
for jobs I'd walk around with this
binder okay I was trying to get a data
job and I'd walk around with this binder
it's just a three ring binder and uh in
it I would have a bunch of my work this
was my portfolio so see I chose some
graphs that I had made and like what it
would represent so this is some data
visualization that I showed I showed
this is a machine learning model that I
created and I printed out you know this
is some more PCA that I had done which
is like some stats technology stuff
um I showed them how I did some image
process control I did some confusion
Matrix stuff like that anyways I would
bring this physical portfolio to
interviews and I would sit down and I
would say look I have evidence guys look
at this evidence I have evidence that I
can do machine learning I can do data
science I can do all the stuff that you
want me to do and people started taking
me seriously with this portfolio now the
world has changed you don't need to have
a binder you need to have a binder on
the internet you need to have a
portfolio on the internet and that's
where it's going to be full of projects
and these projects prove your experience
because really at the end of the day you
can make your own experience
you can fabricate it you can make it up
and that's what I'm going to teach you
how to do in the next couple minutes
okay so you guys ready for the five
secrets about building these projects if
you guys are stoked say yes all right
I'm already losing my voice I actually
did um office hours for MIT today so I
already spoke for like an hour so I'm
speaking an extra hour for you guys
right
secret number one is to be motivated you
have this is your cheat code guys this
having a good project in a portfolio is
literally a Golden Ticket it is
the amplifier it is the cheat code it is
everything that you need to break into
the fields okay if you guys are commit
if you guys can commit to making
projects
I promise you your confidence is gonna
Skyrocket let's get a Skyrocket you guys
it's gonna be crazy you're going to feel
more confident and you're going to be
talking to recruiters you're going to be
talking to hiring managers you're going
to push this on your LinkedIn and
everyone's gonna know how good and how
skilled you are so this is not like
this is not like a Coursera course in
Python like you're like oh I'm gonna
take this course like I hope it helps
I'm telling you guys this is the
linchpin this is like the booster to
your data career and so you should take
this seriously you need to be motivated
you need to be excited this is something
that you should like really be stoked
about
okay so that's secret number one is you
have to be motivated and I'm not I'm not
gonna sit here and motivate you guys
yourself but you know think back to this
what would you do to have this type of
thing coming at your way
what would you guys do the secret the
golden ticket the cheat code is projects
so you have to take projects seriously
if you're not taking them seriously
right now okay that secret number one is
it's a mindset projects are the cheat
code
actually everyone spam the chat with
projects are the secret
projects are the cheat code give me that
in the chat because I want you guys to
type it down I want you guys to
internalize that projects are the cheat
code you know what I'm gonna actually
put that in the chat I'm gonna go to the
chat hold on
projects are the cheat code everyone put
that in the chat all right and I'll move
on I want to see those but I'm gonna
move on to secret number two and that is
choosing the right topic okay
some people are like Avery I'm stoked I
just saw someone say I'm stoked AF
um
but well how do I what do I choose the
project on what do I what do I do what
type of project do I do I'm going to
simplify this for you guys really nice
and easily okay there's only when you're
choosing a project there's only two
types of projects to choose okay one
it's going to be a hobby that you like
or a job that you're interested in that
is it don't do a project on anything
else
a hobby that you like or a job that
you're interested in okay those are the
two choices that you guys have for
um
for this for choosing a project okay
only two options okay I've got it I've
got it nailed down for you
what are the two options
hobby or a job you're interested in so
let's go ahead and explain this so your
guys's goal is to have a finished
project okay you have to be motivated in
order to finish a project how many of
you guys have unfinished projects we're
going to talk about that here in a
second but but if you do say aye in the
chat all right so if you have unfinished
projects it's because you were not
motivated enough and if you weren't
motivated enough it's because you didn't
have passion you didn't have it in your
heart you didn't feel the fire that you
wanted to build this okay so we get that
passion from choosing something we're
really passionate about a hobby
or or our future a job we're interested
in so like for example going back like
if you guys really want to work for
Amazon that's like your goal you guys
want to get this email from Matthew
butts saying this is Matt from Amazon
I'm reaching out because one of our
hiring managers came across your resume
which by the way has my portfolio on it
and is interested in you then you need
to be choosing a jaw a project that's
about that job okay
all right so it's either a hobby or a
new job those are the only two options
the only two options I like how
everyone's saying like I differently in
the chat I love that you guys are
awesome uh unless your hobby is sinking
ships of course
hey let's let's actually do an example
so one thing I want you to do is when
you're doing it for a hobby or a job
you're interested in is you're actually
going to try to solve a real world
problem okay so for example if you're
going to work for Amazon this is
something that I'll talk about at the
end inside of my course I talk about but
you're you're thinking what keeps them
up at night what is Amazon stressed
about what's something that Amazon's
gonna have to deal with in the near
future like how could I help Amazon and
pretend that you're working for Amazon
before you even working for them if you
can apply to a job and say hey I
pretended like I was in an Amazon data
scientist or a data analyst this is a
problem that you guys have this is how I
solved it you're gonna stick out like a
sore thumb in a good way people are
going to be so interested in you so try
to solve a real world problem when
you're doing a project okay and we're
going to go ahead and do an example
let's practice so in the chat tell me a
hobby or industry that you are
interested in okay so this could be a
hobby an uh an industry you're
interested in a job you're interested in
we could do Amazon we could do Netflix
we could do soccer we could do reading
we could do anything just put something
in the chat and I want to see what you
guys want to talk about right now okay
what is a hobby job or industry that
you're interested in I'm gonna turn on
my fan I'm getting kind of hot I'm
getting I'm getting fired up so I'm
getting a little bit hot
okay
okay we got pharmaceutical industry okay
so if you want to do something for the
pharmaceutical industry you'd find a
pharmaceutical job that you're
interested in look at the requirements
see what skills it requires maybe SQL
maybe python maybe Excel and then look
at your responsibilities and see okay
maybe you're supposed to make reports in
Tableau that represents how well the
pills are made for pharmacy for a
pharmaceutical company you're gonna
basically try to do that in your project
so there's lots of ways to do that I
don't have time to go into all the
details it's something I talk about more
in my course but basically you'd go to a
good place to find data kaggles like the
bare minimum but kaggle's great
um inside of my course I have literally
a million other places to find data find
pill data pharmaceutical data and do a
project based off of that okay let's do
one more
um let's see oh serial killer psychology
that is crazy I don't know how much data
we can find off of that but that would
be really interesting uh e-commerce is a
great one so let's say you want to work
for Amazon that's an e-commerce company
do an e-commerce project
solve a problem or even start an
e-commerce company and try to use the
data from that company I don't know
that's a little too far maybe it'll
start a company that'd be cool though
but just do something that that
company's already feeling we'll do a
hobby because I didn't I didn't see too
many hobbies travel uzma says travel is
a hobby it's like one thing you could do
is like maybe do like for instance this
is one thing I do when I go on vacation
I record all my steps and stuff like
that so maybe you do a travel dashboard
of how many steps you took in different
cities and stuff like that okay
um so anyways that would be an idea for
a hobby thanks all you guys for all your
good answers okay whatever you said
write that down because that's that's
what you're passionate about if that's
what you told me okay
I love I love the other one places that
allow dogs in I'm a big dog guy so I
like that one okay that was secret
number two does that make sense you're
going to try to solve a real world
problem when you choose a project you're
choosing what
choosing what either a hobby or a job
you're interested in done okay let's
move to secret number three know the
three different types of projects did
you guys know there's three types of
projects
there are only three types of projects
in my mind
skillshare a data story and a product
okay those are the three different types
okay
they go up in difficulty so a skillshare
is easiest but it's the least impressive
uh a data story is Middle impressive and
middle difficulty and a product is the
most difficult to do but it's also the
most impressive okay so whatever you
guys need to do take a screenshot of
this whatever write this down but
basically there's a skillshare the data
story and the product and I'm going to
dive into what those are right now and
show you some examples if that's okay
with you guys you guys don't mind if I
show you some examples of a skillshare a
data story and a product right you guys
don't care don't care if I show that
okay sweet looks like you guys are
excited so let's talk about the
skillshare a skillshare is the easiest
to do is the least impressive but also
takes the least amount of time so you
know it's good in that way so over here
I have a skillshare
um from someone on LinkedIn it's a one
sentence to two sentence to three
sentence explanation of what this code
or what this does like for instance this
is a python example where they're
replacing missing values with the most
frequent category in a column okay
um
so yeah that that's what they're doing
and then here's the code that shows it
you can do this with SQL you could show
like a like different graphs in Tableau
or power bi but basically you're just
showing an example it's showing that you
can do this scale here's an example and
one to two sentences okay that's what a
skillshare looks like
does that make sense do you guys
understand the skillshare
um it's the easiest it's the least
impressive but it's the easiest to get
started with so here's a really good
example if you guys have your phones out
or maybe take a screenshot or take a
picture or whatever all right
moving on okay next there is the data
story and as a reminder this is a step
up right so we went from the skillshare
which is easy to do but not that all
that impressive to the data story now
which is in in between okay and actually
the data the data story is the one I
recommend the most so this is a data
story uh right here
the story is football coaches analysis
using python so football being soccer
for my United States people uh here's
how I use data science to extract
Insight insightful information about
coaches from the best International
championships it has this is like an
article it's a story it has a picture it
has paragraphs of text it has code
embedded inside of this but it's a story
you're not showing a skill you're
solving a problem and telling the story
of how you solved it so how many of you
guys have been in 21 days Data before
anyone been in my program 21 days of
data if you have put a 21 in the chat so
I know you're here I didn't see like
kamakshi was here I think Jason's been
in there maybe before so I did see some
of you guys recognize some of you guys
but inside of 21 days data we make a
data story about solving crime in New
York City right that is a data story
it's paragraphs with a bunch of analysis
with a conclusion
this is the one to do because it's
really impressive and it's not as hard
to do okay
so most of the time I recommend my
students to do data stories
next there is a product
there is a product a product means the
way it differentiates from a skillshare
I mean once again as a reminder this is
becoming more impressive right it's
getting more difficult but it's becoming
more impressive
and the way that is is it's like a
finished product that you can send
someone to okay you can send someone to
um this for instance this URL all of you
guys can go here if you want don't leave
don't leave though okay take a
screenshot and visit later Avery data
dash mchealthy dash optimizetool dash I
don't know the rest of it okay but this
is a streamlined app that I made and you
can send someone here and it's doing
analytics so a product like in this
particular case it's like a tool this is
like an interactive tool that someone
can use that shows off your skills so in
this particular case I created a tool
that actually took all the McDonald's
menu data and will actually optimize the
the meal plan for you so it'll basically
minimize the amount of calories and
maximize the healthiness and you can you
can change the plus and the minus over
here on the left hand side and this does
something called uh linear programming
linear algebra type stuff don't the
subject matter doesn't matter
necessarily but what matters here is I
can send this to a recruiter so for
example like imagine I'm applying to
McDonald's
hey I built this really cool tool that
we could give customers that will show
them how to eat healthy and still eat at
McDonald's do you guys think McDonald's
would be interested in seeing that if I
was like uh applying for a data analyst
or data or a scientist position I'll
tell you they would be okay
um by the way by the show of say
McDonald's in the chat has anyone seen
this video that I made on YouTube about
this this is one of my favorite projects
this is part of building 30 data science
projects in 30 days okay so there you go
those are the skillshares there's the
skillshare data Story the product they
go up in difficulty but up in
impressiveness so if you can make if
you're capable of making a product
products are really cool they're really
impressive but they're also hard to make
so that's why I tell most people to stay
in the data story Zone okay
okay awesome we saw some people who
watched the McDonald's cool okay my next
step is pretty simple it's just going to
be focus on visualization
focus on data visualization because let
me ask you this okay everyone in the
chat answer this if you could if you
could if you had to lose all of your
senses except for one
what would you keep
what would be the one sense would you
keep would it be sites would it be smell
would it be your mouth would it be your
ears would it be feeling if you could
only keep one of your senses which one
would you keep
the answer for most normal humans and
and maybe you guys are all normal but
like when they actually do like studies
about this
site is the number one thing people
would keep because we as humans see
things and so data visualization is the
process of taking numbers and tables and
turning into something beautiful that
people can see okay
um so focus on data visualization
because one humans love it okay we love
to see data visualization but two it's
easy to do
how many of you guys can use Tableau how
many of you guys can use power bi
how many of you guys have ever seen me
teach about flourish and how easy
flourishes
how many of you guys can make a graph in
Excel
how many of you guys can do maybe step
up and go into Python and do something
in matplotlib or Seabourn or I don't
know something like that you can usually
make data visualizations fairly easy and
if you don't know how to make data
visualizations fairly easy
uh get in contact with me take 21 days
data it's the last time we're going to
teach it on Monday
um probably probably anyways I'm not
here to talk about 21 days data but my
point is it's easier to do data
visualization than you think it is it
looks really impressive and you can
start today okay so it's it's really
they're not too hard to learn someone
just said that is that he just said that
you can learn this okay and you can make
a cool graph pretty quickly so the bar
is low for cool data projects with
visualization okay I didn't have time to
add an example here but if you've seen
my 21 or my 30 day science project in 30
days on YouTube word clouds word clouds
are really fun to look at and super easy
to make okay
okay I'm moving on to step five are you
guys still with me
are you guys still watching you guys
want to see step five
would it be okay if I show you guys step
five you guys all right with that
all right let's do it let's let's go to
step five
step five and in my opinion this is the
most important one okay so make sure you
pull out your whatever you're taking
choose notes I think step five is the
most important one
and you know if we go back
if we go back to the very beginning here
okay I'm just gonna come back here
remember this projects is what breaks
the cycle
projects can lead to this
and remember this is the most important
part
projects are the cheat code for landing
your next job okay so if there's one
thing I want you to remember projects
are the cheat code
but here's the thing guys you have to
press enter on the cheat code cheat
codes don't work if you don't press
enter and so basically step secret five
is pressing enter on the freaking cheat
code if you build a project and it sits
on your computer and it never goes
anywhere else it doesn't count
it doesn't help you it doesn't help you
you have to press enter on the cheat
code and so the best project is one that
you will finish
stop doing half unfinished projects stop
wasting your time if your project stays
on your computer half finished
it really doesn't help anyone because
projects are what Mart is marketing you
okay it's What markets you
and if they're sitting on your computer
no one else can see it no one else can
see it so you need to finish your
project you can't be like this Squirtle
okay anyone else feel like this posted
this on LinkedIn a couple days ago you
might have unfinished project unfinished
project unfinished project unfinished
project and there's another project idea
that comes up
guys finish your darn projects and I'll
show you some tips on how to do this
right now okay I'm gonna show you some
actionable tips about how to do this but
you need to be finishing your projects
the secret is do modular projects
modular means like it fits into one and
then fits into two and then fits into
three and all that good stuff okay like
you can you like like Legos like it's
kind of like Legos are modular okay and
what I mean by this is it's kind of like
a marathon
anyone run a marathon before in the chat
if you've run a marathon before in the
chat please say Marathon I just want to
see who's here I read my first marathon
last year it sucked I don't know if I'll
do it again we'll have to see but a lot
of you guys when you're doing data
science projects you're trying to do the
marathon the whole thing you're trying
to make it awesome
but here's what's interesting about a
marathon is it's made up a little
the little races as you go so you can't
run a marathon without first running a
5k
without running a 10K
without running a half marathon and then
the marathon so for instance if you're
starting off and you're you're just
getting started with this okay
just just just you can have a goal to do
the marathon but just start with the 5K
and once you've done the 5K
once you've done the 5K post it share it
it's okay there's nothing wrong with
having a 5k metal I have 5K medals
hanging up somewhere in my office I love
5Ks 5Ks are fun 5Ks show you run a
little bit right
so if you're trying to build the whole
Marathon you're never going to finish
you're going to get to the half marathon
and it's gonna just stay on your
computer unfinished but you can shoot
for the marathon but just post the 5K
first if let's say you're shooting for
let's say you're shooting for a half
marathon but you get stuck after 10K
just say you did a 10K just call it 10K
and post that because you can always
pick a low Finish Line and go back and
add more later okay
so for instance I was recently doing a
project I had a grand idea for the
project but I only had two hours to
build it okay and with this project
I built it but I built it in a way where
I was done I could be done after an hour
so I built a minimal viable product okay
MVP have you guys heard that before
MVP MVP not most valuable player minimal
viable product and the minimal viable
product is something that you can just
post it's the it's like it's like the
bare minimum post the bare minimum at
least it's something you can always go
back and add more later but what you
can't do is like like really like you
think about your LinkedIn you think
about these projects it's it's really
online marketing these projects and
these portfolios you put them on your
LinkedIn recruiters are constantly on
LinkedIn trying to find data analysts
and data scientists these projects are
kind of like little mini sales people
trying to sell you to companies to
hiring managers to recruiters and these
little sales people they can't work they
can't work for you while you're sleeping
they can't work for you while you're at
work they can't work for you while
you're at the gym unless you put the
projects online so if if you're never
gonna put these projects online even
unfinished you know unfinished meaning
meaning you are planning on doing a half
marathon and you only did a 5k then
you're losing these these little workers
that are going out and trying to to like
help you okay
so that is my advice like you need to
post the projects you can always go back
and add more okay everyone understand
the little workers these little workers
are going on LinkedIn and they're
pitching you they're pitching you to
recruiters hey
you know how about Marco how about cat
pet Petra Petra seems pretty cool like
look at this cool project that Proctor
made these little these little workers
they can't work for you unless you post
okay
makes sense
okay so in review secret number one is
you have to be motivated this this is a
big deal if you guys can do projects you
guys can land your next job okay two
when you choose a project it should be
about your job or your hobby
three
um you need to think about am I doing a
skillshare a data story or a product I
recommend sticking in the the data story
area but there's benefits and there's
pros and cons to each four focus on viz
because it's cool and it's easy and five
pick a low Finish Line okay
so I didn't have time to cover basically
how to get eyes on your project where
and when and how to build a portfolio
where is the best place to get all this
data how can you take like school work
and like previous employer work and turn
that into a project in a portfolio how
do you do like the ride up around all
this I didn't have time to talk about
this today I'm sorry we're out of time
okay but would you guys mind if I just
took a quick 10 minutes and explained A
system that I've been creating to make
all of this process easy for you
basically I want to know if you guys
would mind if it takes 10 minutes and
just talked about the system I've been
making if so please just put yes in the
chat and we'll do it okay we've seen
enough yeses we'll go ahead and do it so
basically what I'm going to show you is
this system is going to focus a lot on
this stuff over here okay how do we stay
motivated how do we actually pick jobs
and hobbies you know what's the pros and
cons to the share the story of the
product how do we even make those
um you know how do we focus on this
what's some good things that we can do
how do we pick a low Finish Line but
also how to do portfolios best place to
get data okay I'm seeing a lot of yeses
you guys you guys are ready you guys are
excited about this all right I like it
okay so cool this is a system I've been
working on probably the last four months
to make this as easy as possible
it's called data science project Studio
and it's the ultimate course on building
data projects and portfolios literally
to my knowledge it is the only course
extremely focused on projects and
portfolios so I just want to make this
clear right now
this this course right here
is not going to teach you Excel it's not
going to teach you python it's not going
to teach you SQL it's not going to teach
you anything okay I have other programs
that do that or you guys are in boot
camps or master's degrees or you guys
are new to me or something a lot of you
guys it's not the skills that's holding
your back it's these little workers that
are working for you and marketing you
you don't have them and you need to have
them you're missing out on the cheat
code so this is basically how do you do
this cheat code of data projects and
portfolios okay and basically what this
is is an online course with I can't even
remember how many lessons maybe like 40
lessons or something like that and I'm
going to teach you everything you need
to know about projects and portfolios
okay this is kind of what it looks like
just a screenshot
um one of we'll get to some of the
coolest things that I have in here but
like for instance there's this whole
lesson right here called the one million
data set catalog I'm going to give you
access to over a million different data
sets that are category categorized for
you so if you want to find sports if you
want to find tennis data it's there you
want to find dog data it's there you
want to find restaurant data it's there
okay I'm going to show you about you
know how to get five times the time with
hiring managers I'm going to tell you
this all the time the best project is
the one that you finish I'm going to
give you motivation to keep finishing
there's a whole q a board here where you
have unlimited questions you can ask me
let's go through uh some of the features
but what I really want to come back to
is this okay keep in mind that basically
the cheat code
is projects right
and it can lead to this when you when
you're when you're playing on achieving
level it looks like this okay
so
um some of the cool things that you're
gonna get when you join this program is
you're going to have a killer data
science portfolio in 30 days it's gonna
help you land your next job okay
one of the things you're going to get
it's really cool it's this project
brainstorming sheet so if you have
trouble if you have trouble coming up
with projects you just go to the sheet
fill in the blanks all of a sudden you
have five project ideas it's like magic
okay it is like freaking magic so you're
gonna get that 47 value that is included
inside of this course so you're gonna
have the sheet so that you can make
great projects that you're excited about
okay
next you're gonna get the 1 million data
set catalog 97 value basically if you
need to find data I'm gonna help you
find it it's I've put it inside the
course in a way that you're gonna find
some awesome data really cool
next I'm going to give you a 107 project
ideas so if the brainstorming sheet
wasn't enough then how about 107 project
ideas some of them even have tutorials
uh over 40 of them have tutorials okay
next I'm going to give you the Amazing
Project swipe file never heard of a
swipe file before it's basically like a
reference sheet of like really good
examples so I'm going to give you like
some awesome examples that you can just
kind of copy or model after
um and create awesome projects that way
29 value I'm gonna give you the eight
step write-up template so like one thing
I I really emphasize with you guys was
it's all about data stories right that's
that's what's hot right now that's the
best you know return on investment for
your time and so you in order to write
that story you need to have a write-up
and so I give you a template that kind
of walks you through step one do this
step two do this step three do this step
four do this all that good stuff
um or the next thing I'm going to give
you is a GitHub Pages portfolio template
so we didn't have time to talk about
portfolios at all today but portfolios
are where your projects are housed I
guess I did show you I did get to show
you guys
um my portfolio a little bit right here
right where did it go
this I'm gonna give you a template to
make something like this okay where
basically in a few button clicks you can
have that for yourself all right so I'm
gonna give that to you 109 129 value
really easy industry standard GitHub
Pages really fun
um next I'm going to give you the
Insider's Guide to getting project scene
it's like we talked about how important
projects are but we didn't talk about
how to get them seen okay so that's
something I'm going to really specify
how to put them on your resume how to
put them in a cover letter how to put
them on LinkedIn how to like get your
portfolio traffic I'm going to cover all
those things 29 value and then unlimited
questions answered you can use that q a
board I check it pretty much every
single day and if there's questions on
there I answer them okay does that make
sense
this is all that you're getting but
really you're doing all of this so that
you can have a killer portfolio that
will help you land your next job so if
you add up all that value right there
basically we're looking at 648 dollars
okay that's how much value you're
getting from this course I'm Gonna Save
You hours of time and I'm going to help
you land a job quicker but I don't want
to charge you guys 648 dollars I want to
give you guys a special deal today okay
so so really what I'm actually going to
tell you guys this for is 150 dollars so
150 you're getting all of this so I
don't even know what type of discount
that is like 500 off basically 500 off
you're gonna get it for 150 but since
you guys are here on this webinar okay
since you guys showed up and you guys
spent time with me I appreciate you guys
for the first 50 people
we're gonna do a hundred dollars
100
that's it you get access to all of this
stuff so that you can start making
projects start sending out those little
sales and marketing people on LinkedIn
on indeed you know doing marketing for
you and uh and basically
um working for you to to actually do all
this stuff okay so there should be a
button right below if you guys don't see
that button maybe a lot of you guys uh
are on YouTube in the end right so I'll
go ahead and paste the coupon code for
the first uh 50 people to get access to
let me see if I can find where did the
chat go guys where where do we go okay
right here uh coupon code for the first
100 people right here I'll put it in the
chat
um but you guys can use that and that'll
take you where you can where you can
join data science project studio and get
all of this stuff so that you can start
making cool projects send your little
workers out to the world make a
portfolio and start to get inbound leads
from Big cool companies offering you
jobs so you can start to feel confident
when you have interviews you have an
interview let's say with Amazon hey
Amazon look at this project I made isn't
this cool isn't this awesome
isn't this cool
okay couple comments here
um a couple comments here um I also
wanted to go I think I have one more
slide okay this is what it'll look like
oh yeah I forgot to mention this the
other thing is I'm doing this right now
honestly I feel like I might regret
doing this
I don't know if I should tell you guys
that but
um I don't know I was feeling kind of
generous and what I wanted to do is like
not only do I want to give you guys
the course
but I want to give you guys some
one-on-one feedback so if you guys go to
that link right there
um you also have a button at the bottom
uh that you can click right here and
you'll add a coaching call with me this
is a 40 minute session where I'll give
you one-on-one attention I'll help you
plan out a project review your project
look at your resume something like that
for it's usually 150 today you get it
for like 75 okay honestly I don't know
why I'm doing that because it's a lot of
time probably for me
um and I charge 150 through this
normally so anyways I don't know why I'm
doing that but it's up there right now
it's too late for me to change it um so
if you just click that button right
there you can add that coaching call
with with me and once again I'm not
doing this more in the future to be
honest okay so I'm gonna just open it up
to any questions that you guys have
while you guys are getting that the
first few people are getting signed up
um just let me know what questions you
have about this program about projects
about anything right now Now's the Time
to ask okay I'm here to do pro to answer
questions so a couple things
uh juban said hi Avery is there any way
to get a recording of This webinar
um yes so the recording for this webinar
should be sent out afterwards
it might not be up that long but I will
I will put this inside of uh project
studio for those who join too so
um like I said I usually do about 48
hours for these types of webinars
that'll be up um you should get an email
about it or it should be on my YouTube
one of the two
um but also I'll upload this to people
who join okay okay a couple things
gulmar says this that is almost free
well we have lifetime access to them yes
you'll have lifetime access to this and
thank you for saying this is almost free
um yeah that's that's I honestly feel
that way
I'm anyways I think I think I think this
is something that a lot of you guys can
can learn from I use this I actually
almost called this that Pro the data
project Bible that was almost the name
of this course because it's more of a
handbook than a course to be honest it's
more of a handbook okay
um so so good question there
um Corey
um Corey can you do these projects
without code yes you can you can just
use Tableau visualization flourish I
have a bunch of examples that don't
require code inside of it I also just
want to make this really clear okay
if you're expecting me to teach you
python in this course don't buy it if
you're expecting me to teach you SQL in
this course don't buy it if you're
expecting me to teach you Tableau in
this course don't buy it I'm not
teaching you anything other than
the infrastructure of projects and
portfolios okay but that's that skill is
one never taught
I teach at MIT it's not taught I got a
master's degree from Georgia Tech not
taught there no one's really talking
about this so these are these are skills
I'm teaching you that are not really
widely talked about so if you want to
Learn Python like I said I have other
programs that can do that you can go
find other ways to do that whatever
today I'm focused on how you build a
project how you build a portfolio that's
it okay
okay Amanda's in awesome glad you signed
up Amanda
can I purchase uh the course later with
a hundred dollars as I don't have that
much now
um uzma it's a good question
I honestly don't know the answer to that
because like I said the first 50 people
are getting that 100 deal everyone else
is at 150.
um
I don't know how long that's gonna last
um so I can't tell you I can't tell you
what's what the deal is there so
um the answer is maybe but highly not
likely
um that's that's just my take right now
um do we need to have data science
skills is data analytics knowledge good
enough it depends where yeah I mean
start where you're at if you can do you
can do a project in Excel and most you
guys I'm guessing know Excel One Way or
Another right like you can start you can
the tools aren't necessarily what's the
important part it's the write-up it's
the structure it's defining the right
data asking the right questions
brainstorming stuff like that
so good question there uh tarun okay
um pampila says can you tell me again
what's included in this okay this is a
lot of what you're getting I honestly
didn't have enough room on the slide to
include everything else I'll actually do
a little live demo and show you guys
exactly everything you're getting
um but first I just wanted to uh let's
see I just wanted to
let's see let's see how long give me a
second
I want to just
let's see oh I'm not showing my screen
sorry
okay I just wanted to uh congratulate
Petra for joining I want to congratulate
Christian for joining Google Now for
interesting for joining Amanda for
joining Nema for joining all of you guys
this is awesome stoked to have you guys
along for the ride this is this is going
to be a lot of fun and I think you guys
are going to learn a lot okay
um okay so uh pompilo this is what is
included in all of this right here um
like I said I kind of run out of room
I'll do a live demo here in a second and
show you guys what's included
um googler said I already purchased
never done any project the only reason
that I did not know where to start and
how to improve thank you Avery gooner
welcome if you have any questions ask
them in the Q a board like I am happy to
have answer questions if there's
something missing in the course I'm
adding to it over time so we can talk
about it
um can I still get the one-on-one if uh
uh call if I got this from another promo
uh cat yes if you if you wanna if you
already like purchased uh data science
project studio
um just send me an email to Avery
um Jay wait no I'll let me I'll just put
in the chat if you've already purchased
and you want if you want a one-on-one
coaching call right now for the for the
really cheap 75 that I'm gonna hate
myself for doing send me an email to
Avery at datacareerjumpstar.com okay and
just tell me your story and I'll make
sure you've bought and stuff like that
um you can't I'll say the 101 coaching
call is not a one-off if you want a
one-on-one coaching all just the
one-on-one coaching call
um
it's gonna be 150 but if you've bought
this program or another one of my
programs we can talk okay good question
Gabriella says the GitHub templates part
sounds awesome I want to give a better
look at my GitHub profile okay
um
that's a great question Gabriella like I
also want to just emphasize that GitHub
pages is not the same as GitHub so
that's something I talk about inside the
course that you guys a lot of people
don't even realize GitHub pages is made
by GitHub but they're pretty two
separate products and GitHub pages is
much better than GitHub so I'll teach
you how about both
I'll teach you about both don't worry
I'll teach you about both
um but uh but yeah okay
good question okay
um keep asking questions I can I can
still see them okay
now is the time to uh ask and we'll talk
about questions okay
I want to uh congratulate Allison on
joining awesome stoked to have you
Alison
um okay let's see what else what else
what else where where'd you guys go okay
right here
okay so let me do a little live demo if
you guys would you guys mind if I do a
live demo real quick and just show you
what's inside the course is that chill
if you guys don't want to see it I won't
show you you know but if you guys want
to see it I will
let's see
let's go here Library
so you'll log in basically
these are my other courses we can talk
about them a uh another day but um
basically this is data science project
studio right here
click right here let me show you inside
of the course okay
so this is what it will look like
um and okay Petra said it was actually a
hundred dollars and fifty cents yeah I'm
sorry the the coupon code is 33 off of
150 so it ends up being a 50 cents so
sorry it's 33 off of 150. that's how my
program did it so I apologize
um okay so like here's one of the
coolest things like here's the data
project checklist press this
here's the checklist okay here's the
things I want you guys to look is a
unique data set this is how you can tell
if it's a good project or not
it's designed for what
is it unique did you match the skills to
the outcome will it visualize well
potential for interesting stories
would I myself enjoy reading this story
here's some questions you'd like to know
source of data so you download this by
pressing this button right here
right here you got the you got the form
and I even made it fill outable boom
boom boom boom how fun is that took me a
long time to do that super fun
all right so that's one of the cool
things another thing is this comes with
an app so you can actually get this
whole thing on your phone which is
pretty cool
um so uh that's awesome
um by the way if you have any questions
about this as I'm going go ahead and put
them in the chat because I'm still
looking at the chat
um and uh yeah so uh okay so it comes
with an app another really cool aspect
um here's some of the bonuses so like
here's the 107 project ideas
so like first off I'm gonna give you 30
tutorials that I did and then here's a
bunch of project ideas right here so
like for example
decide the best school for your kids to
attend that'd be a cool project
off of a hobby A League of Legends
dashboard that would be cool off of a
hobby
let's go look at the million uh data set
catalog okay
ready
these are the best data set search
engines the best seven here's the best
uh 14 General data sets here's some of
the most used data sets here's a bunch
of government and political data sets
here's a bunch of science data sets
here's a bunch of sports data sets
here's a bunch of engineering news heads
here's a bunch of Pop Culture here's a
bunch of financial I'm still adding that
day by day okay so there's a lot of
stuff there now let's say let's say
you're interested in doing something
about python maybe right search the
course for python let's see what pops up
oh some of my favorite data science
projects all right here's a bunch of
swipe files of the best data science
projects I've seen on the internet so
here's here's one from Kyle Pastor
here's one from Michael Reeves here's
one from Luke Bruce you guys watch Luke
Bruce on YouTube awesome stuff here's
one from Joma where he actually let a
trading bot let describe let subscribers
trade 25 000 worth such a cool project
obviously you're probably not gonna do
that but uh it's a good it's good
inspiration okay
so there's a bunch of swipe files here
now here is the one click portfolio on
GitHub Pages I'll show you how to
actually create this exact template that
looks like this okay
it'll look exactly like this you can
make this in a couple clicks okay
and you'll personalize it okay I think
that's awesome but the whole thing about
these all features guys I don't even
care about all this
all this crap I'm showing you I don't
even care you know what I actually care
about
is you guys Landing your dream job
you guys feeling confident in applying
for a job interviewing for a job and
Landing a job
that's what I care about
all this Hub of blue about the features
and the like the one million data set
catalog and all that stuff
I don't care about it I don't think you
guys should care about it necessarily
either what you guys care about is this
this is what we want
this is what we want right here
we want this feeling
okay that's what I want to focus on
okay I'm trying to think if there's
anything else I need to show you guys
inside of the course
um I'm actually going to take a quick
little break from showing you guys stuff
inside the course to do something a lot
more fun all right
let's do the giveaway
okay
let's do the giveaway
um I love the chat Allison says finish
project equals job projects other cheat
code it's true guys you gotta have good
projects okay
okay let's do the giveaway for everyone
who's here thank you guys for watching
um until the end I'll be on a couple
more minutes to answer questions break
down any concerns in fact if you guys
have a concern tell me right now I want
to know what the concern is
um but let's go ahead and uh and do the
giveaway so looks like there's about
like 70 of you guys here right now
um actually hold on I saw a question
just out of curiosity do you know what
level of difficulty the projects are so
beginners can start with easier ones
ah I don't I should add that Kari add
that to the Q a board and I'll say like
easy or hard or something like that
that's a good question
okay so to be entered into this giveaway
like I said all you need to do is be
here right now just be here be present I
appreciate you guys being here till the
end ooh uh cat said uh drum roll please
guys hold on I can do a Dremel hold on
how do I do drum roll hold on oh I press
d
okay
um in order to enter into this giveaway
here's what we need to do be present
right here okay
and just type in projects the word
projects okay type in the word projects
as much as you can
projects okay type that in as much as
you can into the chat you can type in
multiple times I'm gonna be really
annoying and just like make you guys
type that in like a hundred times and
I'm just going to choose oh fetch hold
on what do I do uh and I'm just gonna
choose someone randomly all right so
let's see
um maybe I'll make some other what other
cool things can I do I can do a curtain
call or I'll do confetti in here in a
second okay all right projects projects
let's see projects I want to see more
type more you can just copy and paste
and hit enter two if you guys want
um oh my gosh
oh my gosh
okay I'm gonna literally close my eyes
I'm gonna literally close my eyes and
the first one I see I have to go with
okay I'm just gonna be honest okay so
just type it as much as you can
oh I'm nervous okay ready five four
three two one the first name I see
sapna sapna you were the first one I saw
okay I I it was quick I didn't really
see it but sapna was the first one I saw
um sapna so uh if you can it's over guys
so congratulations to uh to sapna
confetti for sapna
um
that's the first one I saw sapna uh send
me an email to Avery at datacareer
jumpstart.com okay and I'll get a link
I'll get an Amazon link sent you one
okay
good thank you for entering everyone I
appreciate you guys entering I did see
there was a question before all this
Project's Madness started
um but if you guys haven't if you guys
want to put the question there put it
down okay
um let's see
let's see what other questions do you
guys have
anything else how can I help you guys
right now
okay I'm not seeing any more questions I
never get that
crazy for 25 USD
I appreciate all you guys playing along
with me I think it's pretty fun to to
mess around and have a fun a fun
giveaway at the end so Sam sent me an
email
um and congrats to everyone else who's
joined like I said I'm really excited
for you because I think good things can
come your way from uh from this session
that we have together okay so let's see
who else has joined uh Taylor thanks for
joining Travis thanks for joining
uh pompila thanks for joining I'm stoked
for you guys we're gonna have a lot of
fun together okay
uh you're very welcome Gabriella thanks
for being here I appreciate it
um what's a good place to get consumer
data on auto purchases okay all right
Allison I saw you join so let's like
let's do an example okay let's do an
example of how Allison would use this
course
so Allison you joined so let's go let's
go ahead and look at a couple things so
um we're gonna go to this section here
called starting a project
thanks Muhammad I learned uh a lot
um
I learned a lot from this webinar oh I'm
so glad that you liked it okay we have a
lot of questions so Allison I'm gonna
put you on the back burner for one
moment okay
um I'm glad you learned a lot Muhammad
that's awesome okay someone says what is
different between the uh this offer and
21 days a day to challenge okay so 21
days of data actually has anyone in the
is anyone in the chat that has done both
of them
that has done 21 days data and this
course Kari you're part of my my boot
camp so you have access to both
I'm trying anyone else has now I don't
know
um
but okay kamakshi's done 21 days data so
in 21 days of data
I'm going to be teaching you
how to do stuff in Python how to do
stuff in SQL so for instance
we're learning how to make graphs we're
learning Tableau we're learning
exploratory data analysis we're learning
SQL we're doing SQL mini projects we're
doing uh Python and stuff like that so
by The End by the end so for example
by the end you'll have made uh it's like
for instance kamakshi I'm gonna I'm
gonna pick on you I think kamak how do I
spell your name she
where'd you go is this you this is you
I think right
is this you yeah okay so like for
instance kamakshi here's her project
great project from kamakshi here
um so for example we'll we'll do data
cleaning we'll make bar charts we'll
make bar charts we'll make a dashboard
and tableau stuff like that okay
the way but this is 21 days data so I'm
showing you how to do stuff in Tableau
inside of project Studio I'm not showing
you how to do stuff in Tableau I'm
showing you how to write this what
should go first so like for example I'll
just show you guys
the eight-step project write-up
right here okay I'm showing you guys how
to go step by step
you know so this this course which we'll
go visit right now is all about how to
how to like begin your data analytics
career like how to get like the
foundations going in terms of data
analytics this is how you build killer
projects that land you jobs okay so
great question
uh D Robinson
um
okay so then Amanda asked if I had one
if I had funds and the ability to take
all of your or to take all of your
courses what order would you recommend
okay so to be honest
um each 21 days that is self times going
on vacation you can kind of go at your
own pace but to be honest this is the
last time I'm gonna guarantee that I'm
holding 21 days data so I typically do
one a month so October starts Monday but
I don't know if it'll be in November
okay
um that's just a side note so it you you
can't it's supposed to be a cohort base
but you can't account you kind of can
South Pace okay
um okay Amanda asked a good question and
I'm gonna I'm gonna kind of answer it
with with uh it's the answer is all of
them so if you guys have like funds and
you're like oh my gosh learning with
Avery's really fun
um learning with Avery's like Avery's
like so exciting I like the way he
teaches it resonates with me I would
suggest joining what I call the data
career jumpstart course which is like
the best bang for your buck so for
example
um inside of this you're going to get
personal brand programming portfolio
machine learning career data analysis
stuff like that you're gonna get all of
this stuff included this is my way
where I'm going to help you get the job
the most okay I'm going to help you get
the job the most okay so it's like like
I said people are loving it people are
landing jobs we're helping people who
just started we had one person who just
started with me landed did a job in like
two or three months double their salary
okay so we're getting really great
results from this this right here is
going to be way more detailed than every
anything I've I've shown you guys it's
like the most detailed
um here it is right here you can see it
is a lot of lessons over here on the
left hand side like a ton I'm teaching
you step by step how to do certain
projects I'm teaching you like machine
learning in this one as well
um but what's really cool about this is
the first thing that happens when you
join this big course is I am
um we're meeting with a one-on-one call
where I'm going to make you a personal
data roadmap we're gonna have a
one-on-one call just me and you and I'm
gonna give you like a like seven week
step plan to like get everything that
you need and the cool thing thing about
this is it it's it's the best way to
land a job because it not only includes
this giant course which on on itself has
a butt load of stuff but it has the
LinkedIn tune-up course
it has access to our hackathons it has a
one-on-one coaching call with me it has
access to project studio and 21 days of
data so for instance if you guys are
like oh my gosh I want to learn with
Avery I've already bought this I've
already bought this I'll just discount
it from the price so for example
um honestly I don't I didn't really want
to pitch this today this is like a whole
different course this is 9.97 so it's
obviously a lot more money
um but like I will give if so for
instance if you bought 21 days data
that's 50 if you bought this course
that's like a hundred dollars I will
discount that from this right here and
not only you're getting all of those
courses but the coolest part is is
you're getting access to me so we have a
what's called it's like a slack
Community it's called volley and it's
like such a cool place where you can ask
questions you can get motivational
quotes from me every Monday I'm gonna
I'm gonna personally review every
project you do I'm gonna personally
review your portfolio I'm gonna
personally review your resume I'm gonna
personally review your LinkedIn I'm
gonna help you with interview prep like
I'm gonna help you a lot in this course
okay so this that's a bigger course like
I said if you're interested in that I'll
just drop it in the chat or you can send
me an email to Avery data at
datacareerjumpstar.com
um and I'll I'll work with you to get a
good price where like it's at the point
where if you've bought other stuff from
me in the past it's it's we'll we'll add
that to the total because this includes
everything okay
just I don't I don't really want to talk
about this today because I don't want to
confuse people with all the different
offers I have but just so you know
by November this is going to be 1500 if
not 2 000. um we've had a lot of success
I've added so much crap to it I've kept
this price for a couple months now
inflation's kicking my butt so we're
gonna raise this price
so anyways just a fair warning for
anyone who's interested okay good
question sorry I went on that for um
um
anyways yeah like like I said I can give
you guys discounts but like I said this
is probably gonna go up by at least 500
bucks within one month or two months
probably okay
um okay uh let's go back to any
questions that you guys might have
um because I did see that there were
some questions
um okay cat see you later D Robinson
you're welcome can you please explain
shortly what happened in the webinar I
just joined a few minutes ago
um honestly the recording
should be sent out I think did that
email send and automated email let's see
if it sent
uh
uh yes you should have gotten an email
that explained that showed you the life
the link to watch the recording okay
um it will be up for 48 hours okay
um what else what else what other
questions do we have
where'd you guys go I lost you okay
difference between this offer and 21
days data challenge I just explained
that so maybe go back and watch but
basically this right here is going to
tell you how to make projects and
portfolios 21 days of data is going to
show you how to do Tableau SQL and
python okay that's how you can remember
it
um let's see
gulnar says thank you Avery really where
do you get all this positive energy I do
not know but please always be like that
love how much enthusiasm you have and
able to pass it to us good I'm so glad
thank you cool now that's really kind of
you
um okay Petra I think I answered the the
21 days data is supposed to be cohort
based but you can go at your own pace
it's not a huge deal
any other questions that you guys have
let's see
um oh okay I was gonna get to Allison
Allison I got so distracted I'm so sorry
I'm gonna I'm gonna show how 21 or how
project Studio Works real quick
okay let's see so Allison your question
was
consumer data on auto purchases
okay so I'm gonna answer this question
I'm gonna kind of not answer this
question I'm going to show you how I
would do it if I was you
so if I was in Project studio and I want
to know about consumer data on auto
purchases I go to well first off I fill
out the brainstorming ideas tool so you
can actually figure out what you want to
do with that data then I go to this
section right here one two three four
five six six different lessons about
where to get data this is going to be
the main one this is going to be the
easiest one I guess I should say where
you can get data via these links so like
one thing you could do is go to one of
these cool links like for instance maybe
we'll go to data world real quick
and search in
consumer Automotive
let's see what pops up we got some data
data sets right here some of these might
be awesome some of these might not be
awesome so you might go back here and
you might say okay let's go to the
Amazon data exchange let's go to that
one instead
how many of you guys knew that Amazon
has a data Exchange
I'm guessing not many of you
that's why you need data science project
studio so I can show you these cool
things right
on the Amazon data Exchange
confined who who likes Amazon here oh
you guys can't see this let me let me
bring it back
um okay that's being slow as dirt to
open
um you might also go maybe you're more
interested in the engineering part of
cars or something like that so you might
go one of these engineering data sets or
the openmv data set or something like
that okay I don't know why it's being so
slow my internet connection is not great
so that's one way you could approach it
Allison another way is to think about
maybe uh let's see that's how to use
kaggle kaggle's a good go-to you might
use an API you might be able to find
like an API for like CarMax or something
uh you might be able to use an API which
has its pros and cons which I kind of
explain right here or you might web
scrape you might find some really good
data that's on the web and you might
want a web scrape and I'll show you like
how to web scrape a little bit once
again I'm not showing you most technical
stuff
but I'll give you a little hint about
where to go
um you might use personal data
anyways so there's a couple different
options you have there Allison to find
stuff
um people did not know about Amazon
great you're welcome Mitch hope you have
a great day too
okay
um
anything else you guys any other
questions that y'all have that I can
answer for you
um like I said
we've uh we've had some people join I'm
really excited for them
and I'm excited to see what projects
they make
and what's how they improve their data
careers
so shout out to Mustafa and shout out to
monitor for joining
um yeah I think we're that about wraps
it up I'm pretty sure we got about 50
people watching right now for those 50
people who are watching let me ask you a
question
what's holding you back from joining if
all this did
if if this program if all it did
Robinson can you share the link again
yeah let me share it real quick
um let me find it the link to join
is here
link to join
um if you
if all that this program did if all that
project Studio did
was help you build your first data
science project
help you break this cycle
help you have conversations like this
help you do this
right here
help you get messages like this
would that be worth it to you
do you think that would be worth it
would that would that be worth the
hundred dollars right now
that's my question for you
like like I said there's no guarantee
that uh that this will get you this but
projects are the most sure-fire way
they are the cheat code you guys
they're the cheat code for landing your
job okay a couple things this is a paid
course yes this is a paid course uh it
is a paid course here's one thing I used
to do free courses guess how many people
finish my free courses zero guess how
many of you guys watch I guess some of
you guys run a 5k or a 10k race by
yourself no you buy the race because
it's an event it's Community it's you're
you're yes get in the game so I totally
stand by the price of this course
honestly the first reaction was people
thought this is basically for it this is
way too much good stuff so yes
uh worth a lot of value uh okay someone
said I think you should do the 25
giveaway once more uh
uh I'll tell you what I will do another
webinar uh later this month uh with with
another with another giveaway
I do like the excitement of the giveaway
though
um but yeah we gave away 25 to Amazon uh
to someone and we'll do another webinar
most of my webinars will have some sort
of giveaway at the end so
that too mama says I will join soon
awesome Mohammed okay cool what other
questions can I I uh I answer for you
guys
is it necessary to learn both SQL and
python to get an entry-level job no uh a
mechanical engineer trying to switch my
Fields I just uh completed my SQL course
and then two to three basic projects on
tableau
uh
let's see
I'm not familiar with python at all
that's fine it doesn't matter it doesn't
matter
um you don't need SQL and python
necessarily especially for a data
analyst job if you know Tableau SQL and
Excel you're good for uh and let's jump
Python's a nice to have for data
analysts entry-level data analysts but
not a need to have
okay guys well let me see
let me just check let's see
let me see where we're at in terms of
the coupon codes that we have left
um let's just go here hold on let's see
coupon codes
coupons
how do I see how many uses this has
it expires after
that
how do I see this
okay I think we are at
Studio
oh we're running out almost so
okay well we got a couple left so
can't wait to get started the 21 days
data challenge thank you for your time
motivation you're welcome Jason okay I
think with that unless you guys have any
more questions
I think I'm gonna go eat lunch
I appreciate you guys being here
and uh we'll talk soon I hope to see you
in in the uh in Project Studio okay guys
um make sure you're getting emails from
me if I'm I sent the recording out if
you're not getting emails from me let me
know and uh we'll we'll try to fix that
okay so uh with that we're going to be
ending the stream appreciate all you
guys being here and talk later

Title: Using Python to Create Image Filters (Python Project Tutorial)

Description: In this short video, I'll introduce you to creating image filters in Python using Numpy & Matplotlib in less than 15 lines of code. We actually use Machine Learning with the KMeans Clustering algorithm!

This would be a great, little, fun Python project 

üåü Join the data project club! 
https://averyjamessmith.com/club

‚Äú25OFF‚Äù to get 25% off (first 50 members).



#python #pythonprojects #datascienceproject

Video Transcript:
in today's video i'll show you how you
can go from this to this in just 15
lines of code in five minutes now what i
was really trying to go for was more of
the obama hope picture vibe but this
works as well let me explain pictures
are just basically thousands of little
dots these little dots they're called
pixels each picture has thousands of
pixels and that creates the dimension of
the image now these pixels are just
little dots of color and those colors
are represented with what's called an
rgb value a red green blue value which
is actually just three numbers that
represents how much red how much blue
and how much green and that creates the
color of the pixel so basically pictures
are just thousands of pixels stacked on
top of each other and pixels are just
three digit values so really a picture
is just thousands and thousands of
numbers actually and because they're
just numbers we can actually use math to
do cool things like put on this filter
and create this type of a cool image so
let's start first things first we need a
selfie three two one
great so to do this project i'm going to
be using python and specifically i'll be
using deepno as my ide i'll have a link
in the description down below that'll
take you to a place where you can sign
up to get this code and the data for
absolutely free so first off i just
wanted to upload the me picture so
here's the me picture right here i
uploaded that inside of the deep note
and started a blank notebook this
notebook i'm going to install imageio
that is a python library that lets you
deal with images i import it as iio the
first thing i need to do is read in the
image you just do that using the i am
read function and that sets it to img
and img as you can see here is just a
big old list of three digit numbers
those are the rgb values so for instance
this first value right here we can
actually probably just put this into
google and figure out what the rgb value
is and see what color it is okay it's
gray this is a gray color that's the rgb
value for that particular field so you
can see all the different pixels and
what their colors are inside of this
image so the image is just a matrix of
numbers you can see the shape here it's
actually a three-dimensional shape where
it has 825 rows and 615 columns that
means it's 825 pixels tall and 615 wide
and each one of those pixels has three
values associated with it so the first
thing i'm going to do is flatten this
and reshape it i do that using numpy and
just built in python if i image if i
flatten it and then reshape it i'm
reshaping it into a this dimensional by
three so basically there's i'm just
taking all the pixels and instead of
having it be an image shape i'm going to
put it all into just one straight line i
just do that because it's easier to do
math so each line represents one of the
pixels that's found in the page it's
going to be
i guess it's going to be let's think
it's going to be
the first line stacked on top of each
other stacked on top of the second line
stacked on top of the third line
and these values right here each one of
these is a pixel each row is a pixel and
the column is going to be rgb
and what i can use is i can actually use
an algorithm called k means clustering
what k means clustering is it says if
you had to go through every single row
of this matrix so if you had to go
through every single pixel and say what
family or what cluster it belonged to
and assign a value or family or a
cluster
what clusters would these belong to so i
set the number of clusters equal to four
because i went through the obama picture
and there was four different colors to
find the actual colors i used this cool
chrome extension called color picker
where i can basically click on it and
then click on any sort of value and i
get the rgb as well as the hex value for
those values so you can see that there's
one two three and then four so i used
the clustering and i got you know four
different clusters go ahead and fit that
for my flattened data and what that did
is it gave a label of a zero a one a two
or a three for all of my values and
those values are going to be represented
by either the red the dark blue the
light blue or the tan color
so i created a quick little numpy for
loop here where i'm going to go through
every single one of the labels for
whatever value 0 one two or three uh the
color is right or where the cluster is
i'm going to assign one of these colors
so i do that in this line right now and
then i just reshape it i basically
unflatten it from the long skinny column
with i guess yeah the long skinny column
basically to that original interesting
picture shape uh the 600 or what was it
825 by 615 by 3 and i do that with the
original image shape and then all i need
to do is in matplotlib is pass in that
value this is once again just just a
matrix it's just a bunch of numbers i
pass that into the i am show and save
the image and show it and there we go
that is how we get that image so you can
take this code and start over and try
something new you can try different
colors than me you can try different
number of clusters one thing i think
would be good to do and one of the
reasons why mine didn't turn out as
pretty as i would have liked it is
assign certain colors to the one the cl
the biggest cluster the next biggest
cluster the third biggest cluster and
the fourth basic cluster so that way you
have like your base shapes and then you
have your accent colors and they're like
more present on the page than others so
you can change the colors you can change
the number of clusters obviously you can
change the image you don't have to make
the image of me unless you want to
although it's kind of creepy so it's
probably fine if you don't this was part
of my series of doing 30 data science
projects in 30 days if you want to check
out two other data science projects
check out these two videos subscribe to
my channel if you enjoyed this for more
python and data science bye

Title: Building a MYSTERY Data Science Project

Description: This is my 30th data science project in 30 days! ü•≥üéàüéâ For this last project, I thought it would be fun to do it live and make it a party! We'll come up with the project as we go! So come, suggest a project idea, build the project with me! And enjoy!


Video Transcript:
right all right there it is we're good
okay we should be live what is up
everyone welcome welcome welcome i'm so
excited to have you guys here i'm on my
30th project
super stoked to be here and on my 30th
project just gonna tag everyone in
discord
come hang
if you want
let's see boom hit send let me mute this
over here
and we should be good all right i think
my audio's good i want to see who's here
if you are here and you're watching
please say hi i want to see who's here
um and just talk hang out let's go have
some fun
uh michael well says glad you got the
internet fixed yes me too and not only
did i get my internet fixed
uh i got an ethernet to this computer
now so i'm stoked my internet is so fast
it is so freaking fast in fact in fact
in fact in fact let's just do a fun
little while while we're waiting for
people to get here
hold on
um inter
internet speed
how did i oh wow this is crazy sorry a
little meta down here all right internet
speed guys watch this ready look how
fast this is
oh i'm doing slow right now i think
because i'm streaming
i'm not too bad it's it's going up
it's going up that's not too bad that's
pretty fast right there right yep 578
and look at that i'm almost at 700 guys
my internet is so much better all right
we got kicha we got kamakshi we got
jeffrey what is up we got ramya we got
shibam shubam i miss you how are you
brother good to see you we got alejandro
in colombia we got michael what's up and
we got uh
alan what's up guys how is it going
i appreciate all y'all
um i'm doing great shoe bum i just am
finishing up doing 30 projects in 30
days if you guys haven't checked it out
you guys probably wouldn't be here but
check this out guys we got lots of
project videos that you guys can go
check out
um and i'm doing the last one on the
live stream and you guys are gonna help
me do it okay so i'm super excited about
that because over the next two hours
i've set aside the next two hours just
be on stream and just hang out with
y'all so um yeah come come hang out come
say hi um
and help me build this project if you'd
like i honestly have planned zero i've
planned zero so far for this project so
like the best part is we can do whatever
you guys want so i can see
let's see i think i can see how many
people are watching
uh we only get we got 15 people here
right now guys so not too many but hey
those 15 of you guys i appreciate you
guys
uh being here so
um let's let's just do this youtube live
stream and let's build a project
together sound good
sounds good to me okay
so with the 50 people here i need your
guys's help please tell me what project
we should do i'm literally an open book
um i'm literally going to build whatever
you guys want to build so if there's
something that you're interested in now
is the time to let me know chat put it
in there say what you want to
want to build a project on do we want to
build it on sports do you want to build
it on marketing do you want to build it
on hr do you want to build it on
engineering do you want to build it on
maybe you want a job in accounting maybe
we do an accounting project maybe we do
um one about
books maybe we do some books or maybe we
do i don't know whatever you guys want
so i'm gonna go ahead and put some stuff
in the chat
give me a suggestion guys and i'll make
a poll for now
but but but put your suggestions in the
chat right now so i can make the poll
um all right we got finance what project
should we
do
all right we got finance is the first
option what's our next option guys
uh accounting or baseball would be cool
engineering with sensor data marketing
all right
all right this is awesome guys let's see
um let's see uh engineering and sensor
data marketing do a project about your
youtube channel to see if the 30 days
has had impact the 30 days has had an
impact so anyways we i thought about
doing that that i thought it might be
kind of meta um
it could be interesting though well i
love to see the the youtube api is not
super easy to use so i might i might buy
away from that one oh but jeff's into it
too crap we got two votes for that
forecasting
um okay so let's see accounting baseball
all right shabam likes the the youtube
too crap guys
the youtube
keys api is not easy to use
we can try it again though
uh based on investment analytics mang
stacks
stock i know i wasn't gonna do one about
stocks it didn't end up happening
marketing or football since the season
is starting
okay i like that jb i see you jb
okay so i'm gonna
we have lots of good options i'm gonna
i'm gonna let you guys vote we're gonna
have sports
we're gonna add youtube and i'm gonna
try to figure it out
i'm trying if i have a plan b
i do have a plan b
so we could do youtube i'll put that in
there
um okay let's see
um
so i think we're gonna do either
sports youtube
marketing
or let's do i didn't really do a whole
lot on
jeff's here though and i like
engineering i don't think i did enough
on finance so maybe we'll do finance
stock okay
maybe we'll do finance stock okay that's
that's that's the four options
i'm putting a poll in the chat now
you guys can vote okay you guys got like
a couple minutes to vote
on what we want to do okay sports
youtube marketing finance or stock
um
let me just send another message to
my discord
or choosing what project to build if you
want
to have a say
send now
okay let's see what's up what what are
you guys saying
where do i see okay we got sports at 50
is what i'm seeing right now
what else we got how do i
how do i see this poll we got 11 votes
come on guys there's 25 of you guys
watching press the pull button right now
make some votes
looks like looks like sports is still
winning come on 11 votes there's 26 of
you guys watching that means 15 people
of you guys have not voted
vote
vote
vote
all right i'm ending the poll
in 10
9
8
seven hurry and vote guys six
five
four three two one
zero all right i'm ending the poll
ten of you guys didn't vote
that's fine
all right what one how do i see
how do i see i don't know how to use
youtube guys teach me how to use youtube
um
and pull
guys can you see oh there we go okay all
right sports won
wow i did not see sports winning all
right do the two highest shalish you're
crazy doing two projects in two hours
that's only something i could do i think
just kidding that that is really hard to
do two projects in two hours though um
it looks like sports was won
and then stock at finance was two
so we'll do sports okay we're gonna do
sports
um
so that's fine i love sports so and
everyone loves sports let's do it i see
dustin's in the house what's up dustin
dustin scheimeck guys go go follow
dustin he's doing a lot of cool stuff
uh project about the nba draft picks to
see if the utah jazz made the right
decision alejandro you're following i
love it yeah for those who don't know i
live in utah the utah jazz just did a
huge trade where we traded away our two
best players for a bunch of future draft
picks so that that could be interesting
to do
i like that a lot
uh okay kamakshi says us open do a
little bit of oh wait that's tennis
right wait is that tennis where's that
golf
or is it both um i know that there's the
us open i think for tennis right now
right isn't that what serena's williams
is playing in
um okay sweet let's see we had some
other uh oh jeff said dis disc golf
stats that's pretty fun also shout out
to michael also just bought the data
science project studio super good stuff
i appreciate that michael for those who
haven't joined i'd love to just give you
guys a little sneak preview okay
basically what project studio is this is
this is the url that you'll go to um but
let me show you what the course actually
looks like inside just to give you guys
a little bit of a sneak preview of what
it looks like because it's awesome
okay so here's data science project
studio
i'm just going to be straight up this is
a zero percent technical course i'm not
going to teach you sql i'm not going to
teach you python i'm not going to teach
you excel what i am going to teach you
is how to have an amazing portfolio
build it with tons of projects and
improve uh your chances of getting hired
at really cool companies you're going to
blow recruiters minds with the stuff you
build inside of project studio so just
so you guys know just you guys get a
feel basically the beginning i'm going
to teach you what a project is there's a
bunch of checklists inside of here so
for instance here's like how to build a
project checklist kind of right here
what you should be aiming for what
hobbies you know some companies you'd
like to work for this is going to help
you get a start to what what you want to
build
um there's going to be a brainstorming
tool so like basically take all the
stuff and
brainstorm a bunch of stuff
i'm going to give you a bunch of project
ideas and i'm adding the actual like
tutorials on how to do them as i go but
here's like a bunch of project ideas
some of them are from this series some
of them are not
um one of my favorite parts is the
million data set
uh
catalog where is that one at right here
this is like over a million data sets
that you could possibly use in different
like scenarios so for instance we're
doing sports so we might be looking at
the sports data set section based on
what sport we choose right here we might
use one of these data sets i don't know
kind of depends um
what's going on so okay
anyways that's that's my pitch um i'm
gonna throw i'm gonna throw this in the
chat real fast uh i would love to have
you guys in there no pressure though you
definitely don't have to but um here's
here's project studio i'm liking it a
lot
all right let's see what else we got
um
tennis okay
show why empty seats don't deserve money
that would be pretty interesting i like
that first class i like that a
lot um i liked other questions or uh
michael was just a baseball one would be
cool he said and i think jb said
football since the season's starting
something like that okay okay
okay let's do another poll
um do another poll right now guys now
we've narrowed it down to sports let's
narrow it down to what type of sport
um just maybe maybe we'll switch it up
because i have done
inside of this i did do an mba project
right here which is pretty
pretty good project pretty fun project
did i do any other sports projects
i did
not okay
so yeah we haven't done any other sports
projects okay so let's i love basketball
i love basketball with all my heart i
love basketball
but maybe let's switch it up maybe let's
not do basketball so i'll make i'll make
another poll we'll we'll get some sports
what sports do we want to do
let's see
um we're gonna do another poll guys
what sport
and we're either gonna do
uh
baseball because i like i like baseball
has lots of good data we could do
football
i kind of hope we choose football
um i saw that we could do
tennis tennis is a sport i have not
really looked at which could be really
cool
um or or i'm gonna throw one in for my
boy jeff
um
we're i'm just gonna say golf and maybe
that is
uh
frisbee golf wait yeah that's what it's
called right or or frisbee yeah okay or
golf all right
tennis golf football all right we'll do
golf slash frisbee i'll give both of
those i don't know those sound cool
he says the audl has a lot of data that
can be pulled from their site hey
i like that
i like that
i like lots of data all right i'm just
sending out the second poll
so oh cricket cricket's a good one i
don't know anything about cricket though
so
gosh why won't this poll go through do
you guys see the poll yet
i don't see the poll
rant rack
i don't know why it's happening
let me try refreshing the page
i don't think the poll went through i
think the polls busted
all right one more quick pull okay uh
sport
baseball
football tennis
or we'll do uh
golf slash frisbee one of those those
two all right
yeah it would be mlb data
all right there we go now vote vote vote
vote we got 28 people watching
once it gets to
15 votes i'll stop all right so vote
quick
ultimate frisbee mlb no not yet nope
pull is up yup all right vote vote vote
uh yeah that would be interesting i've
done one baseball project before
that was was pretty cool i've never
actually talked about it it was for a
school project it was mlb pitching data
and hitting data i guess it was a pretty
cool one
um football
i've never done a football project and
by the way football is american football
i would love to do a soccer project too
but not no one had mentioned soccer golf
is so boring let's at least make it
interesting with the project
that's funny hey my buddy my buddy ken g
that's like his day job he is he does
golf analytics all day long so that's
cool
all right we're ending the we're ending
the poll ready here we go and pull
let's see what won drum roll please
football all right good i want to do
football
sorry tennis sorry baseball you were
outvoted
let's go ahead and do uh let's do
football all right
so for football let's let's talk about a
couple things so one when i'm starting a
project i'm kind of choosing i'm
choosing my project always after two
things and i talk about this
in in project studio in fact i'll just
i'll give you guys some more sneak peeks
this is like since you guys are here and
you're supporting me you're getting a
little bit of a little bit of the course
so um
when you're building a project there's
only two reasons to build it
it's you always want to aim to building
a project you're going to finish and the
ones you finish are the ones you're
motivated to do so the ones you're
motivated to do are either going to be
about a hobby you love or a job or an
industry you're really interested in so
you might love watching the nfl and so
you might select to do an nfl project or
you might want to date a job in the nfl
and so you're going to do a
an nfl project or or i guess college
football too
so
whenever you're choosing a project it
should be about a hobby or a job you're
interested in this case we are choosing
i don't know maybe maybe maybe we want
the job i would love to be in the nfl at
data science at the nfl kind of not
really but i think it'd be cool and
maybe some of you guys want to do that
at least so let's pretend like we're
going to try to get a job in the nfl all
right so that's the first thing um one
of the next things we need to do is is
find a good data set and try to think
what would be interesting and in terms
of like um
data do i talk about this hold on let me
see
no not really okay um but we have a
couple things for american football uh
we have uh college football data we have
two resources here
and then we have pro football reference
right here this is inside of
the project studio so i'm going to click
on this and remind myself what it is
yeah this is like basketball reference
this is football reference this is one
of the best places to have there's so
much data i've actually never used this
one before but there's so much data so
okay we we have this uh resource right
here available to us the other thing i
would tell you whenever you're doing a
project
is
think about like what projects have been
done in this space before
and one thing that's that's uh that's
really cool and i need to add this
inside of project studio is every year
there's something called let me find the
place to put this
let's see let's see i'm gonna put it
i'll put it here every every year
there's something called the big data
bowl okay
and you know all college football is all
about um
bowls right football has bowls i don't
know
but this is something that's really cool
um i didn't even realize this is put on
necessarily by the nfl
but uh every year the nfl puts on the
big data bull and it's basically
it's just like a hackathon kind of with
nfl data um that's really cool and you
can see up here that more than 30 big
data bull participants have been hired
in data analytics roles in sports so if
you participate in the if you want to
get a sports job the big data bull is
something that you definitely want to
participate in what is the mentorship
program oh this is cool
i don't know i don't know enough about
this
wow look at the apply to the 2023 bull
mentoring program deadline september 7th
that is like in five days
mentors and matches wow this is cool
guys
this is very cool i didn't even know
this existed
so okay there you go that's awesome
um there's a video gallery there's a
2021 recap
the fourth annual was in 2022
blah blah blah
there's like a show you can check out
presentations you can check out this
stuff is cool
so
um
i know
i would love to like see last year's
let's just do last year's i think that
would be really good all right i'm
checking in with you guys i'm talking a
lot i don't see much going on in the
chat what's going on in the chat guys
how are we doing are we alive still
i can see the chat over here so just be
talking to me because i'm going to get
bored otherwise all right i don't want
to just talk to nobody for like two
hours
all right
big data bullet is all right
so um
oh wait i'm showing my youtube that's
not good all right um
big data bowl okay so let's try to find
the competition for this i thought
okay here's the finalists video gallery
yes i thought this was on kaggle they
hosted on kaggle
um so here's the analytics competition
um all right dustin says this is gonna
be fun i i hope so dustin so uh here is
the data bull
provided the nfl's next gen stats
tracking from the 2018 to 2022 or 2020
special teams plays all right that's
something that doesn't get a whole lot
of love in
football's special teams
location information for each teams for
each special teams player whenever they
are on the field and includes their
speed acceleration and direction
okay so think about it special teams
that's going to be like field goals but
the thing that i think about is punts so
think about punts
you know you you're it's fourth down you
gotta get rid of the ball you punt it
there's going to be a receiving team and
there's going to be lots of blocking
going on so this looks like it's going
to have player speed acceleration
direction
hopefully a location as well
i don't know
um you can also utilize scouting data
from pff i don't know what pff is so
let's go find out
oh
wow
pff is like daily fantasy is that what
that is
i don't know what pff is still
anyone know what p p f f is
all right jeff see you later
this is the best part watching you find
the data oh i'm glad you like this
michael i appreciate that it's it's
always a challenge to find good data
sets
um and i'm still not entirely sure if we
even like this data set sometimes you
like will find data set and you have to
really get into it before you're like oh
this is good or this is bad so
um nfl is the most
with your creativity and analytical
skills the development of these new
methods could lead to additional stats
for special teams place if successful
your effort may even be adopted by the
nfl
that'd be cool
for on-air distribution you can watch
future games knowing you had a hand in
improving america's most popular
sports league that would be so cool
that would be awesome all right
alejandra says pro football focus okay
thanks is that like extra stats i don't
know what that is they mention it all
the time on on
undisputed that's so funny undisputed if
you guys don't know is a show on fox
that has skip bayless and shannon sharp
it's a very interesting and unique
dynamic i'm more of an espn guy but uh i
like undisputed it's not bad
so this was this was uh
let's see can i still do this hold on
let me make sure
okay i understand and agree
okay we're good we're good we're good
okay we're good
okay cool
so a couple things um
let's see what else it talks about um
you'll quantify what happens on special
teams plays you might create a new
special teams metric quantified team or
individual strategies ranked players or
even something we haven't considered
okay cool so very open-ended right this
is a this is very open in the project
um and and just a couple things so the
evaluation here
um
it's
general actual practical and novel
insights for players so the what what
like the thing that they're asking for
is just to give them something
interesting okay it could be a new
metric it could be strategy
it could be players
rank ranking players stuff like that
and this is how they're going to score
just basically on how cool how
innovative how accurate how relevant how
clear it is
so that's fine okay
by the way this is a hundred thousand
dollars if you win i'm gonna participate
that's like
that's like a lot of money next year i'm
gonna win guys who wants to be on my
team next year
we're gonna win
i'm gonna like yeah we're gonna do this
next year for sure
this is a dope competition
okay timeline
wow it started in september
wow so this is not like a hackathon the
way that i think of it because you have
october november december
to work on it you have three months
that's like a fourth of the year that is
crazy
but oh prizes is a hundred thousand
total so you can win fifteen thousand
dollars basically okay
okay great so
it's very open-ended they're just like
hey tell us something interesting
um looks like we have pff scouting data
oh wow
oh this is like
this is like uh
the snap time
and operation time and hang time oh wow
the kick type the kick direction
the kick direction actual
the return let's just select all of
these
the return what did i say
return direction
missed tackler
assisted tackler
tackler
kickoff return for
oh formation
gunners
wow this is very detailed yeah
punch rushers
special teams
safety
vises
kick contact type okay i don't know a
ton
about all of that stuff so we'll have to
figure that out oh here's some file
descriptions all right i'm seeing some
um some stuff that is a lot of money
it'll be an awesome project to compete
for yeah for sure that's more than i
make in a year yeah exactly that is a
ton of money
um
could show how many of the athletes have
a majority of their money after five
years and if not where did it go that's
true that's always an interesting one
like like a little data journalism piece
on nfl like salaries and how they spend
it i don't know how you'd get that data
set necessarily but that would be cool
um all right so we're looking at the pff
scouting data play level scouting
information for each game okay
then we have the game data which is
going to be when the game was
the play data which is like when the
play was
looks like you have like the kicker and
where it was at and stuff like that
you have the player data and then you
have the tracking data yas
the x and the y
and the player location
okay
and the speed and the acceleration
the distance
orientation direction jersey number
okay cool stuff like this
okay let's see what this looks like oh
this is the scouting data okay and has
like the type of the kick and stuff like
that
okay cool that's awesome
very cool
okay
guys this is an awesome data set i
really like this data set i think we
could do some cool things with this so
here's what i'm thinking right now
we basically have
the x and y data of like the play
that's one thing okay we have the x and
y data of the play okay so just think
about that we have that
we have what type of kick it was
we have the players information
could be interesting
and our we know we're trying to get an
nfl job we're trying to win this
competition so we're just trying to come
up with something interesting there's
nothing like that's very open-ended we
just have to come with something
interesting
and we have an hour and a half
so
crap
not a ton of time
for this project so
um i'm opening it up to you what what
ideas do you guys have based off of this
um can't promise i'll take any of them
but like when you think about some of
this uh
some of this
stuff
what what what is interesting to you the
first thing that comes to mind
is i've done a project similar to this
before you know your prior experience is
useful
um so for example one of the projects i
did a long time ago i'll pull up my
portfolio here
was very similar it was mba player
tracking so this was xy data
the nba players and i kind of like
pretend like you dipped their feet in
ink what would it look like
and uh this is kind of what it would
look like and i eventually made these
cool
oh it's not here
i made kind of cool animations
i don't know why the animations aren't
here
huh
but yeah i made some cool animations
that was like almost like you were
watching the play as a bird's eye view
and seeing what would happen
so we could do that that'd be pretty
easy to do
that'd be kind of cool
we could probably make it so it's a
streamlit app
so it could be published anyone could
use it and you choose like the game and
choose like the punt and you could like
watch it from a bird's eye view
thoughts
that could be it'd be like an animated
dataviz hosted on a streamlined app
that could be cool
i've done a lot of data visualization
and i'll tell you why data visualization
is the easiest thing to make projects on
it looks good
it's easy to do it requires the less the
least amount of coding usually
so i feel like it's kind of basic
okay but austin said sounds fun
mixing up location with acceleration can
bring up something cool okay tell me
more about that shoebom what do you
think in there we do have the
acceleration data that is that is part
of it for sure
alright alejandra says sounds cool too
maybe i'm too harsh on myself sometimes
guys i've built 30 projects so i'm like
i'm like and honestly the mcdonald's
project is my favorite one
it's hard to beat that one all the other
ones i don't care about as much the
mcdonald's one was so much fun all right
people like the acceleration all right
let's look at the acceleration so we
have the direction and the acceleration
here
that could be interesting let me think
about how to do that
all right we're gonna we're gonna do it
it's just the first thing that came to
my mind
and i know it's something i could do in
an hour and a half
okay
yeah i think it's something we could do
in an hour and a half i think we could
do other cooler things that are like
more data sciencey because really at the
end of the day
all i'm going to be doing is programming
in python and doing a data visualization
and plotly
it's not very data sciency
but it's very it'll be easier to do
and i think if i'll do something data
sciencey it would just take me longer
and to be honest i'm already like my
my voice is going out already so
and i'm hungry i didn't eat lunch yet
okay we're gonna do this all right guys
so what we're gonna do
is we're gonna take the tracking data
which has let's just make sure it has
the game id
the play id
yeah okay so it has all that
the question is do those look good for a
human to read probably not if i had to
take a guess
so let's take a look and see if i can
find that so that's going to be oh yeah
we have all the years too
maybe we'll just focus on one year so
here's the x here's the y
show all the columns here
hit apply
okay so on average how much a player
sprints before passing the ball just a
long shot yeah that would be that would
be really cool too
let's see so
we have
the display name
i don't know what that even is
there's a lot of
interesting okay
we have the jersey number
we have the position we have home or
away okay so we need to
at least like i'd love to have like the
team names so i already know i'm gonna
need to do a join
on the tracking data
with i think the games data
which is going to have
the home team
and the visiting team
so at least i'll be able to have those
i still wish it was a little
what about
wait what is the plays do we oh this is
the play description oh
that could be cool to do have that shown
all right so we're gonna do a little bit
of a combine
on the data set that's for sure
so we're going to join
one of the tracking years the plays data
uh do we want the players data
let's think because they're on the
tracking
what is there here
i don't think there's anything is there
i mean it'd be hard to have all the
player ids right so let's see let's just
try it more time
oh wait why can't i see the columns i
don't want zero i want all of them
apply there we go
so let's see we have
the x
oh wow i also just realized
okay yeah i just realized something as
well but that's fine we'll make it work
i don't think there's any need for the
player data unless we're going to use
the scouting data
the scouting data
could be useful too okay we'll combine
everything okay
we'll have to combine all this data sets
but before
but before we combine it let's just make
the minimal viable product okay because
combining it is just gonna take a little
bit of time it's not gonna take a ton of
time but i just kind of suck at
combining stuff sometimes so it might
just be faster to not combine
like it might just take me time to
combine so let's not combine let's build
a minimal viable product let's get it up
and loaded
so that way like we at least have
something
because it's like one thing like the
best data science project you guys can
finish is the one or the best data
science project you guys can do is when
you finish and if we just lower the bar
for finishing it it's going to be easier
and we can always go back and add to it
you can always make it better but if
it's not published ever no one ever
cares okay
all right cool so i have a plan we're
going to do this all right
so
the i have we have the data set
we know we're trying to impress an nfl
team
we know we want to build some sort of a
streamlined app that basically shows the
plays
as they go okay
so let's just start minimal viable
product okay here we go so i'm going to
start coding
i'm going to
create a new folder
we'll call it day 30
here day 30 and we'll call it big data
bowl okay
i'm just going to open that up it's
going to be blank
to do this i'm building a streamlit app
so i want to use an ide that lets me use
streamlet well
i'm just gonna use spider it's what i'm
most comfortable in and when i'm live
coding it's nerve wracking already
because i suck at coding so it's good to
have something i feel more comfortable
in
and it'll work great
and the other thing we need
okay
i'm gonna save this
and we're gonna save it in
the day 30.
we'll call it app.pi
okay because it's going to be a
streamline app
so i know i'm going to use streamlit so
i'm going to import streamlit as st okay
and then i'm just gonna start actually
making the streamline app just so i can
get a feel for how it is
uh i think we're gonna call this
the
the special
special place
viewer
that's kind of a dumb name but whatever
all right and then maybe just put some
text below it and just say
this web app
lets
you
view special teams
plays
and
gives you extra
insight
okay i'm gonna hit save
now i'm gonna hit run
which isn't actually really going to do
anything but it gives me
well actually that doesn't ever work for
me so i'm just going to go prompt
we're going to open up anaconda prompt
so i can open up a terminal with a good
python base in it i'm going to cd to
this location
okay i'm going to hit ls der sorry
and then we're going to hit streamlit
run app.pipe
crap my voice is going out okay then it
launches a streamlit app for us and
here's our stream what app we're already
done guys
we did it we built the streamlight up
whoo see that's why i love streamlink is
you have a working web app
in like one second
so easy so easy gotta turn my fan on
it's getting hot in here okay
so that's the first thing we're gonna do
can i get some w's in the chat or
something like that guys because we're
already we've already built the
streamlight up
okay just looking at some other stuff
okay cool we're good
uh okay so next minimal viable product
trying to get this done as fast as
possible we actually need all right
austin i love it nice i love it um all
right so uh to get some
what should i call it we gotta get some
data so let's get rid of this
let's get rid of that let's get to here
and
i'm only going to do one
season i think i'm kind of just lazy
we could definitely do more seasons but
let's start the minimum viable product
of just one season okay 2020 is the most
recent season so let's do that i'm gonna
download that
i'm hoping
that's just
how big is this gonna be
i didn't really think about this but
this is probably a pretty big csv if i
had to take a guess
let's see
257 mag compressed
if i extract all
extract
what are we looking at here
not too bad i'm gonna bring that up
um
okay come on
i don't like having the
hold on
hold on i'm trying to move it up a
column i'm just going to move this so
it's like more on my head there we go
delete that delete that paste it
oh
crap
okay guys i i messed that one up okay
hold on extract all
and then i want to extract it
there
oh i saw a gig it's a gig
not good i'm not good at bigger data
sets it's harder
all right whatever
we'll just
let's just take this and call it we'll
just call it uh
it's one and a half k alright we'll just
whatever i'm too lazy we're just gonna
leave it there
okay so then we're we know we're going
to need pandas in here
i'm a little worried how big it is i'm
not the best at big data i'm more of a
medium data guy we're gonna call it data
frame pd.read
uh underscore
csv
uh
where is this at i'm gonna rename this
just call it data
data
so it is in the data i always get my
slashes wrong
that could be the wrong way don't make
fun of it if it is tracking 2020.
okay and i'm actually just going to run
this
over here just to experiment with stuff
oh boy it's a big data set
okay so
let yeah this is nfl data yep
um this is taking a while to load and
one of the reasons robert what's up
robert how you doing glad you're here
um okay that took a little while to load
and one of the reasons why that's bad is
every time you change something on a
streamlit page it reloads the data you
can use something called caching to try
to
um
you know mitigate that and it works
really easily i'm gonna have to remind
myself how to do that in streamline but
once again i'm just gonna make it slow
at first because i'm trying to get the
minimal viable product out okay
so okay there's the tracking right here
um okay
now
we basically want to choose a few things
right we want to choose
let's see what do we want what do we
want to choose we want to choose what
game it is
so the first thing we're going to do
is select the game i think right
let's see event nfl display name
team
frame id play id so yeah the first thing
we're going to do is choose a game id so
we're going to choose a game id first
and then we're going to choose a play id
great video i don't i didn't know pandas
is optimal for larger data sets it is
not optimal for larger data sets
it will work
is not optimal though
there's probably something we could do
to make it more optimal but once again
i'm focused on minimal viable products
also arash appreciate you being here
hope you are well
okay so the first thing i'm gonna do is
choose a game id and a play id with a
streamlets little down clicker thing
um and i can't remember what that's
called so we're gonna go to streamlets
docs
right here
uh
and we're going to go to the input
widget
and it's a drop down or radio let's see
what is what a radio looks like
is that no we want to select box
yep we're they're going to click on
select okay so this is what the command
for a streamlet select box is
but first i want to actually
i think
well we'll go minimal viable product
first okay so here's the select box
and the thing we want to ask them is
uh what game so
uh choose your game
and
i'm just gonna hit save
so you guys can see the update up here
what that looks like hold on
save
uh
oh man something's not looking good
why is that taking forever
huh
oh because it's the data set now
oh it's going to be slow we'll we'll
figure out a way to fix it later but for
now okay that's fine and for the df you
know for the games we need to remember
what the df is called which looks like
it is the game capital id okay
now if i run that inside of here for my
choices
and add a
dot unique to it that'll have a
the game chooser okay so i'm going to
call that the
selected game okay
the next thing
crap i need to remember
okay that's fine so then so then the
next thing you need to select
is the play id
i mean they won't know what the play id
is but they'll just choose one
and i guess that's really where
this could come in handy
because there's a play id here is there
like a cool name for it
no
but there is in place
where you could grab the play
description maybe
and that would make more sense
yeah the play description
could be really good
so we probably want to select the play
description but for now let's do the
play id
time to switch to an r shiny app why are
we supposed to do an r shiny app oh just
for the speed no we're not switching to
r shiny
our shiny is harder not hard but harder
than streamline we're going to stick in
streamlight
so
okay so here it is we're going to select
the game then we're going to do the
exact same thing but then we're going to
select
the i play
play id
so choose your play we'll say okay
and that is going to be
um df
in the well
in the play id but i'm actually going to
filter it beforehand so that it's only
the plays that are in the game so we're
going to call this the df game now which
is equal to the original df
where the df in the game id
game
id
is equal to the selected
game does that make sense so we're going
to make a little smaller data frame and
make that the options here for the
selected play okay so then once we
select a play we're going to have the df
in the play i think this is going to be
a little bit of a memory problem maybe
i'm not making this ideal but
we can always go back and make it better
later so here we're going to df game
in the
play id
where that is equal to
the selected
play id so now we've narrowed it down so
that we only have
the df play which is the specific play
from the specific game okay
after that we want to do the
animation i think is what we want to do
um
the animation
there's a couple different ways to do it
the best ways to do it is probably with
plotly
so we're probably going to use let's
just search
uh plotly animated scatter and i'd like
to make this a little bit prettier than
it is but we're gonna start minimal
viable products okay
we just need the minimal viable product
okay so yep this is what we're gonna
build right here
pretty dope huh
okay so we're just gonna steal this code
put it into our
um
our code we're gonna import plotly here
and
instead of using their data frame
we're going to use our own
dfplay
and the x is going to be i think x is
what it is right tracking 2020 x and y
all right robert says extremely dope i
like that robber i appreciate you x is
equal to x y is equal to y
animation frame is equal to
now this is interesting
what are we going to use for the
animation frame
um
i thought there was a frame
there is the time
i don't know if we want to use that or
not
i don't know how the i don't know what
the best scenario is here let's let's
just look a little bit let me think
i'm doing this all on the fly all right
yeah let's use frame id
let's use the frame id here
frame
id
now the animation group
that that was country on this one
right and these are different countries
so i think the group would actually be
in this case would be the player
uh
player
or maybe the jersey number
oh yeah it could be the display name
should we make it the display name
let's let's start easy and we'll make it
the
look at the jersey number well because
two players could have the same jersey
theoretically
maybe we'll do nfl id
um let's see nfl id
what is the nfl id we have to look up
here
nfl nfl nfl
where is it
game data
yeah okay we'll just do the nfl id
that's fine cause that's like their
player id basically
nfl
id
the size
the color okay the color we're gonna do
based off of home versus away
which will be like the two different
teams right
i think that's somewhere in here you got
the team right here if you put in team
and let's just get rid of
let's make the hover
their display name all right
um
now the
that we're gonna get rid of for right
now and the size we're getting rid of
two for a moment all right okay hit save
me a minimal viable product here so we
need to double check
um how to get this into streamlit
so if you go to the api reference and
you go to the chart elements and you go
to streamlet plotly chart
you can see that we created a figure and
then put it in here so let's just do
that
we'll call this the
the annie for animation
annie equals and then plug in annie okay
this is this could be the end of the
project right here like theoretically
this could um this could end the whole
entire project like we could be done
here um we have like another hour to
make it nicer but like theoretically if
you needed to you could publish this
project i think so
um did see some comments raj that i have
missed the projects for 21 days a day or
for the last 30 days have been similar
to today's final um i mean we've
definitely done a lot of projects i
haven't done any of them live like this
this is like definitely the most
in-depth behind the curtain uh scenes
that i've been doing we haven't done any
sports since like day eight when i did
the nba
we did build a lot of streamlined apps i
think this will be our third streamline
app so that is a little bit similar
your color scheme on spider made me
think that it was our studio derek
what's up hi derek
um interesting my r studio color scheme
is like white
also i missed the beginning what is the
goal of this mystery project we're well
we chose we chose as a team what project
we're making we're trying to make a
project that would impress nfl teams so
we get hired in the data space in the
nfl
um
quick and dirty version yeah exactly
robert that's what we're going for
okay i was kind of stalling oh i didn't
hit save are you kidding me i was kind
of stalling so i could hit save
because it's going to take a while to
load this app
okay so we're gonna rerun
and it's gonna take a while so i'm just
gonna let it sit for a second okay
so we let this sit
and uh see what it looks like although
it should have re-ran since then
i'm a little bit worried
at the size of this oh we got it we got
it we got it we got it we got it we got
it we got it
hey hey oh you guys can't see i'm not
even showing you guys look at hey eight
eight eight hey look at that we got it
built so
we have the football
we have the home team we have the away
team we have their names
uh and we're gonna hit play ready three
two one
all right
there's
a guy coming up
he kicks it oh it's a kickoff
it's a kickoff they're running down the
fields
you know you can see all these different
players
uh okay look he's gonna catch it
he's gonna catch it let's see what's
happening
oh it's a touch back
he didn't catch it
oh he didn't catch it
oh man that's funny okay but hey that's
awesome and then we can switch to play
six hundred and so that's such a
different play
that was a little slow it is a little
slow
let's see we'll let it load in the
meantime i'm gonna look uh austin says
his 30 projects are awesome you have to
check him out austin i appreciate you
thank you
uh model training yes it is thinking
um guys got to go look at the other
project videos which projects are the
most behind the curtain like this this
is great because he is showing thinking
prostate coaching real nice arash none
of them are like this they're definitely
not going to be
uh as as
behind the curtain as this this is like
the most behind the curtain
um
sweet everyone likes it womp womp looks
awesome so cool freaking sick sweet
awesome
i'm glad you guys like it so once again
i'm just gonna play another cool or
another play
i can't tell what's happening here oh
wait it was already playing that's why
hold on so this looks like a punch this
looks like a pun formation
they have the football
they
are
um
let's see let's see okay there it is
there's the football getting hiked
it is going to
get punted here in a second
let's see three two one okay there's the
punt
it's going to the right
you have these guys i don't know how
those guys got here didn't even see them
and then you have this guy finally
moving
interesting
um
so crap okay this is cool
this is very cool
um we could be done like honestly we
could publish this and we could be done
um
i'm trying to think if i want to make
this uh
this uh
this like i'm trying to think i don't
know
i'm trying to think
what could we do
how do we make this better the the
fastest ways
yeah i think i think uh i think derek's
probably right
we probably instead of choosing the play
we should probably choose the play type
well i don't know it's like friends so
we could choose kickoffs
and plays maybe
i don't know let's think
yeah okay i think we want to do that i
think you're right i think we want to
choose what type of play it is first
so for example i don't think we have
that information on this one right
let's see team events
no yeah okay it's not going to be on
this one so we need to include the plays
id here
yep the plays id
that's
is going to have the special teams type
right here so we're going to download
this data set
and i actually don't want to be doing
the joining every time it's on streamlit
so i'm actually going to write a quick
script
separate script that's not in the
streamline app that's going to combine
this for us okay
because
combining does take a little bit of time
it's already a little bit slow so we
want to do that outside of
the
the app so let's see so i want to pull
this in to here
i want to
extract all
extracts
and
i don't know how to
get this
i'm just going to rename this as dj
then i'm going to pull this
place
out of it and put it into the data
plays okay cool
is that the place for all of the season
right i think it is
okay that's fine we don't really care i
guess
so i can delete this now
now we're going to write a new script
right here
that's going to be called let's just
call it combine
it is going and this is where i'm not
great guys this is where
pandas is not awesome import pandas as
pd
we're going to
do plays is equal to
pd.read
csv
and what's it called is it just called
place plays csv the other one is going
to be called tracking
set it equal to pd.read
csv we'll call it tracking2020.csv
okay that's going to read them in
okay i'm going to run that
no i can't find plays why not oh because
it needs to be
uh
data slash
data slash
data slash save
run
i have two very day people on data
science avery hey i appreciate that
arash that's the receiver and the corner
lol oh i didn't know that this data set
was all special team stuff yeah it's
just
special team stuff
uh
boscar ready says you are great man hey
i appreciate that thank you for the kind
words all right so here's what we need
to do we need to do
we're going to have plays and tracking
now right then we need to combine them
so
ah this is where i suck and pandas is
not as good we need to do a pandas
basically what's an inner join in sequel
okay
so we need to do an interjoining sequel
and to do that we're going to do well
it's going to be pi and pandas though so
pandas merge is what it's called
let's see
we're going to do
okay
this is not gonna be pretty
okay so on the tracking so we're gonna
call this combined
on the tracking we are going to do
uh
merge
which what are we merging the
wait what hold on hello i don't know how
this actually works no i'm kind of
confused
yeah okay you pass in the data frame so
we're merging
the
plays onto the tracking
how
is probably equal to enter
um left on and right on okay so left
on is equal to and right on
is equal to
um and i don't remember what the where
it needs to be i don't know actually
hold on
crap hold on no i'm now i'm doubting
myself plays dot columns
so it has to be on
the game id
and the play id actually i'll explain
why here in a second tracking.columns
and over here this is
the game id and the play id okay
so
there's no
primary keys in these data sets actually
and we need to make a primary key
so
um we'll do that right here where we're
going to make
primary keys and the primary key for
each of these in fact we're just going
to call it primary key
um
in the we'll just call it pk for primary
key
is equal to
the plays in the
game id plus
the plays in the
uh
play id
that makes a primary key and we'll do
the exact same thing
with the tracking data
tracking
tracking
tracking all right i don't want to rerun
at all so i'm just going to run this
left will be on the pk
and right will also be on the pk
i'm hoping this won't screw things up
there's a chance there's a chance it
does
okay let's see
it's gonna be slow cause like i said
it's gonna be hard
shubham said shall we compare the first
play of each season and see how they
start off the game that could be
interesting could definitely do that
that's another way to slice it i think
the way i'm slicing it is not off of
when
just you choose
actually it'd be cool to choose your
team first
i don't know i'm building up to that you
might be right she bought them we'll
have to figure that out
dustin says keep it up avery you're
doing great
derek says i've got to use spider yes
spider's good
um
other things than spider vs code is the
most famous one or pycharm
probably
our jupiter notebook really probably at
the end of the day but they do different
things so
spider's the best unless you're gonna do
notebooks use deep note
okay sorry
um okay so there's combined it's done
now let's look at the first like 100
rows it's it's huge you can see
this makes me a little bit nervous so
hold on
this makes me a little bit nervous hold
on let's look at the length
of tracking
anyone can tell what that number is
11 million so this is 11 million rows
the length of combined should not be
bigger
oh fetch looks like it is
see this is where i don't get
merged in pandas
all right so instead of doing inner
we're going gonna do left we're gonna
try that
gosh dang it
see that runs we we want
the length to be the same or lower
for an inner join that's what i don't
get with the inner merge
i don't get that
and maybe i'm using the wrong function
inner
uses intersection
yeah it should be
makes no sense
no sense at all i've been using jupiter
since i started learning python after
learning r in school but i'm just
realizing how similar spiders are studio
it is very similar to our studio
combined is still huge
oh
[Music]
why is it so big
the length of combined
larger than length of tracking just to
make sure
true
gosh dang it
this i told you things could get a
little crazy here guys
i don't know why it does this
let's look at join instead
i don't love merge it kind of scares me
let's look at join
if any of you guys want to look this up
how to combine two
data frames how to like merge them
yeah so it doesn't have left on what
does it have
it has on let's just use on
this would be this is where sql it's
like this is what sql is made for
no suffix specified okay hold on i think
we're getting close
uh
we'll just add
these in
i don't really know if i want to add
these in
let's even get away with just one of
them
right suffix we'll just say
is r
let's see if this works
okay i think it's working i think we're
good
now the question is the the length
okay combined
okay now that worked
now let's actually make it inner and see
if it goes down
sorry this is the boring part see this
is why i didn't do this at first we got
the minimal viable product first
oh wow intersect
that makes me worried about the left
then
oh man let's check the left so let's
look at
com we'll call it uh
call it we'll just call it uh preview
we'll set it equal to
the combines dot head of the first 100
rows
preview
oh yeah we only got
oh we have all these nands
see fellas
this is not what i wanted
i knew this this scared me with this big
data set inside of pandas when we have
to combine
okay let's see if i can think of
anything else
let's think
well there should be pks that are equal
to each other right
let's just let's just check the
the plays data set and look at the pks
oh i did just realize something
i actually wanted to put these as
strings
no
[Music]
that should be fine
um
[Music]
it should be fine
i'm a little stuck
i'm a little stuck
on combining these
what the inner didn't look
good the left didn't look good
let's see
join columns of another data frame
join columns with
other data frame either on
index or on a key column
okay let's see the example
so you took the
data frame here
and you took the other
and on
oh you didn't even say on here huh
let's give it a let's give it a left
let's just delete
this no i think i need to say
on that maybe it's not a left
l suffer f suffix
is equal to
l the inner's not working though that
makes me a little bit worried
yep not working let's try the left
sorry this is the boring part of the
live guys
yeah merge is always sucky for me i
don't like combining stuff in
pandas but it's important
let's see if i can find the left here
so
siddhant says i'm new to data science
i'm learning lots of things watching you
go along this project i imagine how
elantical thinking really works in real
time world situations please keep
inspiring oh i'm so glad to say that
thank you and yeah sorry i'm i'm stuck
i'm not as fast as i would like to be
right now
let's see preview
it only has
let's see
you look at all these nands that's what
makes me worried
all these nans
and why would that be the case
because pk
should it must be have something to do
with the pk
you got this may the force be with you
all right let's think about let's let's
let's first just double double checking
uh let's let's double check to make sure
um
that the
that there's matching primary keys so
uh
python set intersection is what i'm
looking for
w3schools baby
they're the bomb diggity
intersection
okay yeah so i want to first check
i don't know if i can do this with a
panda series but plays
pk
dot intersection
inter
section
of
tracking
pk
series has no yeah
let's say
maybe
of
two
series we always have you set
on this let's see
huh
yeah if i just use the set of this hold
on let's see
so first off let's use set here
let's use set here
run that
okay so there's tons
as there should be
so the prime the primary keys is not the
problem
the primary keys is not the problem it's
this
stupid
tracking
what happens what happens if we change
plays over here with tracking
and we make this an inner again is it
going to be nothing
gives me nothing
pandas joining two data frames
makes me so mad it should be so easy
so easy you don't want to do that
because we're not concatenating them
[Music]
not concatenating them
yeah thanks for sticking around guys i
i'm sorry has full featured high
performance in memory join maybe it's
just too big
or maybe i need to try it like this
let's see if it gives me an example on
this
that's what i'm doing so this is exactly
what i'm trying to do
this is exactly what i'm trying to do
where it should be on key
it should have a b c and d
why isn't the inner you know what let's
let's take out the how let's take out
the how all together
let's let let's let it decide how
let's take out the how
that worked i think
nope bunch of nans
bunch of stupid nands
try subset the data that would be easier
that's not a bad idea
it's all nands too
let's get rid of let's let's go back to
the plays here
the tracking here
let's get rid of the
these two things maybe
let's get rid of the how
so it's just going to look like this
left
no look at look at look look
that's using left and right hold on hold
on hold on
hold on uh x
equals
pd.merge so not starting the data frame
the left and the right so the tracking
and the plays
on
pk
all right it's thinking guys it's
thinking i'm feeling good about this one
feeling good
i'm also feeling my stomach all right uh
shabam said you sure that there aren't
replicating data that might be added up
twice while the join
there is
shubum you're right
i'm pretty sure you're right
i'm pretty sure you're you're right hold
on hold on
hold on hold on let me just check this
just just check but i think you're right
x
oh
my son thing just fell okay uh preview
now this will have an air still i think
oh it doesn't have an error we're good
we're good we're good we're good
but you made me think your your question
made me think here i just want to check
so in plays
you will be unique for every guy
game id and a play id
okay
um
so hold on let's make sure
[Music]
so now
there's an x and a y for example this
guy's all dean marlowe
and all of this
over here
hold on
so see how this is just alternating back
and forth
i think you could be right i think
there's literally
sanders 65 yards
the play idea here is 39.
what is it over here
play id
oh see that you're right here's the play
id these are all 40s
right
here is the
the pk
and then this is getting 39 and 40
over here because
the pk where's the pk over here
yeah you're right shoe bum i made a
mistake
let me think if i can fix the mistake
yes you can it would be on an
on a left join of the f
of plays no of tracking
so hold on
so this worked
let's run this up here
this worked
we'll call it combined
we need it to be
tracking
yep tracking is the bigger one
plays
yep
and then the how
is there how in here
i'm not sure there's a how on that let's
see if i can find out
this is this is the confusing part guys
this is the confusing part
uh
how do i learn more about pd.merge let's
just google that merge
right
see that that takes me the data frame
one though i don't want to do the data
frame one i want to do the pd
the pd.merge one
all right i think um
i think who said it austin i think
austin's right we need to make this way
easier so
we're just gonna simplify the crap out
of this really fast
so we're gonna call this uh
uh
bit
big is equal to tracking
and we're just gonna do it in the pk
the
tracking dot columns let's see
the pk
the play id
and the game id
well and also
the uh
you know what there's not going to be
a primary key on this ever
there's not going to be primary key on
this because
then there's going to be
the
nfl
id and the frame id if you combined all
of those
that would be the primary key so i was
i was underestimating that there
so
this would need
to be
if we combined the this this would have
a foreign key though so then if we take
the small and say that's equal to the
plays
which is going to have the pk
the play id
and the game id right
and it'll also have it'll also have
something else as well
uh it'll also have
plays columns i want the description the
play description because there's only
one play description
okay
so
then so this is basically what it should
like a really minimal part
of these data frames would look like
this okay
then i would
game id not in the index
how is that not that's not true
i almost just misspelled it plays
columns
right
oh not capital game
under
lowercase
okay
let's try again
okay we have big and small
x is going to be
we're going to take the big
we're going to join
the small
okay
now the problem is there's overlapping
names so we're gonna put r
suffix is equal to
just uh
like that
oh wait what suffix do you want then
so for the join
so i'm back back to the drawing boards
here oh i just saw it join
r suffix is that what i'm saying oh no
underscore
okay there's x
in x dot we'll just call it x x equals x
dot head
100
okay that right there
looks great
wait
right because
this frame id
no it looks terrible
it looks terrible
it looks terrible because
there should be multiple play
descriptions and that that makes
does that make sense let's think
so the
pk here
thanks for showing me a freaking
how do i not have that in scientific
notation
how do i
guys i'm really struggling with this see
aren't you glad that we did this
the other way first
these should be repeating each other
for example these are repeating
but there should be a lot more of these
so it looks like it's only three
two
one two three four
but i should have a lot
and the pk there
should be equal to the pk here
what is our
okay hold on that could just be
hold on
let's try this one more time
let's sort values
by the um
play description
okay let's just do that ahead of that
let's
see hi aryan how's it going welcome i'm
struggling right now i'm troubleshooting
um saw some comments
you're probably hungry because all that
mcdonald's food isn't really food i miss
that that is hilarious
oh
man let's try this one
no it doesn't look right
it doesn't look right
description is the same but player ids
are different that's okay we want these
player ids to be different
can i open up big and small is that
gonna kill me yeah it's too small
or too big small
let's see
let's see
so this
pk
looks right
and we should just be adding the copy of
this column
all right we're going to make this we're
going to make this even smaller okay
so we're going to say that big is equal
to
big
where big in the
uh
game
id
is equal to and we're just gonna do one
specific one it looks like 2018
2018
zero nine
zero six zero zero zero
and the play id
i am hungry i need to go eat some food
we're going till two though
and play
id
no no and
big in the
play id
is equal to 37
okay so that should
shrink the big down to just one
particular play so that should
be really short
oh it looks like i typed something wrong
sweet
okay
the game 2018
zero nine
zero six zero zero zero oh we might have
we might have a
hold on
we might have an issue here
tracking
dot head
100
let's see we'll just call that
x x nah i don't know we'll call it um
what
is
this so let's go play id 40
okay
so we know we know play id is equal to
40.
and we know that the
game id is 2021
0 1
20 21
0 1.
zero three zero zero
so if i rerun both this
big is empty
what
what what what
i mean
what
what if i what if i change this to
tracking
so let's change this to tracking
tracking
and tracking
nothing this is this is the problem hold
on we're about to find it
hold on we're about to find it we're
about to find it we're about to find it
what is this value
what that makes no sense
what
how do i make this more simple
let's just do this
so this should take this should be
taking
okay that worked
so this is all of
one game
if i set this equal
to and
this exact same thing
is true
all right let's go inside the
parentheses
and the play id
and the play id
okay so i got stuff there
what is
what is the game id
in the zeroth
what about the play id
those are both integers
okay so
if i go back over here
and i say
it's equal to this
and it's equal to 40.
oh i did i did miss a parenthesis here
did miss a parenthesis that could have
been it
okay so yep
we only have
this particular play id
in this particular game id with all
these different frames
okay
okay
all these different frames and i have
small
and i want to do
um and small is fine
i want to do pl
big.
small
okay
uh r suffix
equals to r
okay let's call this something
like a q
no
how how is it getting okay so let's
let's just redo that one more time
we're going to call it
on
pk
and now we're back to the nands
now we are back to the nands
but we know that small
should have
if we look at
big
in the pk
in the zeroth
and we look at small
in the pk
in the zeroth
those are not the same
okay well yeah actually that makes sense
that that actually makes sense because
we're actually looking okay hold on
let's do small
so small is equal to small
where the small in the
uh
actually this this exact same logic up
here
works for small too so i'm just going to
take that
plug it in here but it's going to be
where the small name id in that
and so that should make small a one
line thing it is
okay so here's small
and here's big
and small and big should have the same
pk ready this is the test
small
pk
the zeroth
okay that
kind of makes sense because we didn't
reset the index on either of these
dot reset
index
drop equals true
add that over here as well
rerun all of this
and what we want to see is if they're
equal to each other
so does small
in the pk
uh
in the zeroth
is that equal to big in the pk and the
zeroth or no
those should be equivalent to me
double check
okay it is true and so if we do
that q again
where we're going to join big
on small
on pk
i'm actually going to kind of delete
that one delete
let's just remove it to make sure it
doesn't have any bias
to
it's not going to work
i'm getting nans
i'm out of ideas guys
i'm just gonna try random things
maybe i'll just try
the pd one more time
it worked
that looks right
that is right
okay so how come it doesn't work
if i were to do qq for example
q1 i guess
that should be tracking right here
and that should be plays
and it's going to be a name issue right
or is it because there's multiple
columns the same well there wasn't the
other one too
i gotta
preview that
let's just do preview
um is equal to q1 where q
one in the
game id
is equal to whatever i'm putting down
here
so that it'll be
enough information
sorry guys i know this got kind of
boring
i'm not doing two tomorrow jeff
i'm publishing as is
preview
that's working
that's working we're good
oh my freaking gosh oh
that sucked
that sucked so bad okay now we're just
gonna do q1 to csv
q1
2
csv
uh
csv we're just going to call it combined
dot csv
saving it as a csv and then i'm gonna
try
to uh
i don't know what
i don't even know how that's working
what is it even combining on
because it can combine on game id it can
combine on
play id
it doesn't even know to go off
i think it's working though
okay
okay well i think it's working i'm not
actually entirely sure that was really
confusing
really frustrating to be honest
sometimes it's just frustrating
um we know that instead of reading in
app.pi over here instead of reading and
tracking
we're just going to read it in something
called combined
instead of choosing
the game id
what do we want to choose instead
dude we still didn't get the uh we're
still choosing the game id oh my gosh
that sucks oh well that's how it's gonna
be for right now
so we're gonna do the game id and we're
just we're just acting
putting in an extra select box here
where we're going to choose the play
type
selected play
type um choose your play type
and that is going to be the preview
the
no not description
right here
the special
teams play type
special
teams play
type
okay and then
let's see so we filtered each time so
this is going to be df game right
yes you choose your game go here
then we're going to filter the df play
type which is going to be the this exact
same code right here
but we are going to set it equal to the
play type
right here and set the df game to that
okay
then we're going to choose your play
instead of doing
the play
off of the play id i'd like to do it off
of that cool name that we just got the
play description so it's going to be
play
description
and it's actually going to be df play
type instead of game
that's true here that's true here or the
play description
is equal to
the play id
and then we're doing the exact same
thing so all of that to add
one
extra select
and two
to add the play description
i don't know if that was worth it but
we did it okay
i'm gonna hit run just to make sure it
runs no errors
and then we're gonna see the app
and then i'm already going to um we
already need to
publish this on github so we can get it
done
let's see
okay um
well it's not running very quickly so
let's just go ahead and create the
github
for it already
i'm gonna do it the fast way the lazy
fast way
um we're gonna call this the big
data bowl 2022
create repository
we're going to upload some existing
files
those files are going to be
this whole thing i guess
ah this data might be too big
i didn't think about that
oh
[Music]
okay let's just see
okay this ran
right
okay
we are hitting low memory
it's a little scary
all right let's just refresh this
whole thing
pray it works
the data the data set is big and gibb
doesn't like that
because yeah how big is that
is that three gigs
oh we're screwed three and a half gigs
oh
my gosh guys that's not gonna work
we can't upload three gigs to the
browser
okay there's one option we have
there's one there's one option we have
and that is to get rid of some of the
columns
that that could work so for instance we
could just run
df equals pd dot read
csv
combined dot csv
read that in call it df and let's just
get rid of some of the columns
you can see it's so slow
oh it worked though hold on
hold on hold on
we're still selecting our game not the
way i would like to let's look at punts
why also did that
this should be
choose your play
play type
oh this is so slow i ruined it guys
i ruined it
okay i don't have time
to fix this the way i would like to
right now a project is better finished
than unfinished so here's what we're
gonna do
we're gonna we're just gonna go back to
what i had an hour ago
that is the sad truth of it all
i'm just gonna control
z because at least it worked the other
way
that was terrible
terrible terrible
this is rerun
not great
but at least it'll be done that's all we
care about we're also going to need a
requirements on this no we're only using
pandas and plotly so i think it'll run
by itself
let's see if this runs and then i guess
while it's loading
we can just run
all of this
up here
put that in here
so we got let's see yowza that's a big
file try again
yeah shoot
crap because streamlight requires github
and github can't host the data set
right i
i think that's what's happening
yep
crap we are in issues can you just add
the data to a cloud provider even google
drive
yeah it's just more work
yep we're gonna have to do that really
quickly
um
yeah we can use google drive
no
they have to authenticate
hold on
i wonder if we can just read
can you read csv from kaggle
pandas
you might need the api to do that
um how to read csv url and pandas
i guess we can go here
uh click on this
i don't think you can
because i don't want to make an
authentication with google drive
i'm trying to think of this anywhere
else i could just dump this
we can trim the data
that's an option
uh
place to dump
big csv
let's see if i can just figure it out oh
no
how to do
the pandas how to open very large okay
um
let's see how easy it is to just use
drive
open csv from google
drive
all right did i not put pandas in there
i didn't
okay hold on this this this could work
dropbox okay hold on i think i think
this will work
i think this will work
we just need to go
drive
dump the
the
tracking here
okay
that's taking a while and then just make
it public
and then using that public url
i think that could work
gosh this was a fun lost hour thanks
guys for sticking around
shout out to shabam and jeff
uh stoked for you guys to be here uh
let's see jason i appreciate your help
everyone else who's here you guys were
awesome i'm sorry this took so long
um it was not fun for me either if that
makes it feel any better share
anyone with this link
can copy
okay
we're gonna go here
and instead of reading this we're gonna
call it the
g drive
right that's sharing
and then let's just steal that code
that we saw
right here
url is equal to the id
okay we're just gonna do this ready plug
that in
uh
this is the new url
right here
url okay run this really quickly and see
if it works
pray to the python gods
that seems so fast
did not work
i knew it was too good to be true
dang it
is this still going till two
i mean it's gonna go past two at this
point
it's going until i finish it
oh look at this is the same problem we
had in streamlit
that's what we just
did
this that's what we just did right i'm
just gonna recopy this
put it down here
let's see
oh gotcha you're in different time zone
why is that just like
shoot
ddf
wait am i blind
hold on hold on
no i'm not blind
that did not work
why do people say that works
did i get the wrong link
uh oh it's a viewer maybe i'll make them
an editor hold on copy link
that sounds dangerous to just be putting
this i'm going to give this to the
public
that's the same
freaking
thing
um
you know what hold on i wonder if we
just what happens if we were to
just take
the first little bit
well i guess actually i should look at
what this does right here
that takes that crazy thing
okay so that just gets rid of it
and sets the download to that so what is
what is path and if i plug in path into
my computer
in my browser what happens
oh
that worked
i wonder if the scan for viruses thing
is causing an issue
that's not working all right let's try
one more
let's try one more thing
unreliable
i don't want to use the google service
account
the joys of python lol yup
not good
ah crap
sweet add
ah stop don't give me viruses
i wonder if this would work better let's
just try this
stop
stop i can't even get it
uh paste it it's gonna give an error
because it doesn't know what request is
yeah this virus oh my gosh guys i hope
you guys appreciate
that i'm getting viruses
on my machine for this right now
okay i just need to change this to
the path
no
it doesn't work either so
how do you read
a csv
how
i could
zip it and unzip it maybe
uh can pandas read zip csv
okay maybe what happens if i zip this
again
uh
does anyone know how to zip
in google or whatever this is
i mean it came zipped huh i'm such a
dummy let's just zip it again
uh
zip it again zip it again zip it again
zip zip zip zip zip zip
tracking
or if you can just read this i don't
know how big this is
let me just see if that can go on
here
tracking can that go in there
dowza that's a big file okay
anything else i can try
um
streamlets too big file
um let's see
config option
okay i'm bowed out of ideas for right
now
the only option would be
taking what shubham said and just making
it smaller
that's our only option
so we'll do it
no
should we do it or not
i'm not really too stoked
on doing that
all right
now okay i can't decide
you know what we're just gonna
we're just not gonna deploy
to streamlight right now
it just will not be a live application
it'll just be a desktop app for right
now
so let's just make sure this runs
and that's you know you get so far
sometimes and we'll just have it not be
live and that's life
that is life so
i'm gonna delete these
and we'll just we'll just put up the
animation code
make sure this works
can't say we didn't try
okay well
we're back to where we started an hour
ago
[Laughter]
oh man well i hope you guys appreciated
uh
that adventure yeah sorry didn't turn
out the way we had really hoped it would
um at least we have something you know
that we could show
sucks that uh we didn't get it published
but you win some you lose some
um two hours is what i have time for
this project today i don't have time to
do more so this is really fun thanks for
hanging out with me thanks for following
the 60 days
challenge or 30 days challenge i hope we
don't do 60 days
i
appreciate all you guys being here if
you guys haven't checked out uh project
studio check out project studio
and uh i appreciate all you guys for for
being here we're gonna go ahead and uh
end this stream but
thanks for being here guys
i appreciate all you guys
pretty easy to do on aws yeah but then i
have to do authentication and stuff like
that i don't want to do that and i also
don't want to have my keys
i give everyone the code for free i
don't want my keys on on the internet
i guess i could upload have the keys in
a file not upload the file
um
but
oh ken's just tuned in
well ken you missed an hour of me just
troubleshooting but hey let's show let's
show ken what we made we'll show ken we
took on a challenge from the big data
bowl
where you can choose a game
and you can choose a play
and it'll pop up the animation here at
the bottom so
super funny that is uh hilarious that
you just showed up
hey but thanks for being here robert
thanks for being on alejandro jason
shabom jeffrey
uh razzicotta thanks for being here guys
i hope you guys had fun here's what we
built over here ken
couldn't couldn't get it to deploy to
streamlight the way we wanted to because
of file sizing basically spent the last
hour doing crazy stuff
um
anyways kind of crazy
uh kind of crazy experience i've gotta
run and eat some lunch my brain is not
really thinking very well so appreciate
you guys being here we'll talk later bye

Title: I Used Data Science to UNCOVER McDonald‚Äôs Healthiest Meal

Description: In this video, I use the power of data science to find the most optimized meal plan at McDonald‚Äôs.



üçî Try the web app: https://averydata-mchealthy-optimizetool-v9i1u8.streamlitapp.com

üìù Kyle‚Äôs original project: https://towardsdatascience.com/making-mcdonalds-healthy-197f537f931d

#Python #datascienceproject #pythonprojects

Video Transcript:
recently i've been trying to get into
better shape but i have one major
problem i love mcdonald's so in this
video i wanted to see if i could make a
data science project that would help me
find the healthiest food i possibly can
at mcdonald's and help me reach my
nutritional goals i want to eat the
least amount of calories possible while
still hitting my macronutrient goals so
to solve this problem we're going to use
a mathematical technique called linear
optimization it's basically used to find
the best possible outcomes for these
types of problems and in this case we're
trying to find the optimal food
combination these linear optimizations
or linear problems are usually set up
like this there's something that you're
trying to minimize or maximize whether
that's profit in this case it is
minimizing calories and there's a series
of limitations or constraints that don't
allow you to do that optimally and you
have to stay with inside those
constraints for example in this case we
have to stay within our protein bounds
of 45 and 65 grams of protein we can't
hit a certain level of sugar and a
couple other nutrient constraints using
linear algebra we can set up a
mathematical model for this situation
and use math to find the optimal outcome
staying within the constraints that we
give this problem so i already know what
i want to minimize i want to minimize
calories and the different constraints
i'll be looking at in this particular
exercise are the fat the saturated fat
the sugar the protein the carbohydrates
and the sodium so we'll have limits for
all of those here are the limits that
i've chosen kind of arbitrarily right
here now these aren't necessarily
arbitrarily they're taken from the
government's websites and their
suggestions but you know mix and match
for your own diet and your own lifestyle
next we need data and before i show you
where i got this awesome data set i want
to tell you this project was actually
taken from my friend kyle pastner who
wrote a great medium article about this
project i included this project inside
of my course as a really good example of
the creativity and the thoroughness of
what a project can actually look like if
you want all the resources that i use to
make these 30-day science projects in 30
days you can check out my course data
science project studio which is the best
way to build your data science project
and portfolios i also have a link to
kyle's medium article below in the
description so here's the data set for
the nutritional facts for mcdonald's
menu it is just on kaggle we can go
through see all the different columns
and basically what it is is every item
that they have on their menu and the
serving size the calories total fat
saturated fat cholesterol all the
nutritional values that you might need
to know are in here so go ahead and hit
download so you has that as a csv now i
not only wanted to give the option to
find the healthiest food i wanted to
give you guys the option to find the
healthiest food with your different
macronutrients and what you're trying to
do in your life so i didn't want to keep
this on my own machine and only make it
my constraints i wanted to open this up
to the web and turn this into a product
and so i use streamlit to create this
awesome dashboard tool that basically
allows you to input your different
constraints and it'll tell you what the
mchealthy combo is best for you now the
code to write this is a little bit
complicated it took me about 150 lines
of code to create this streamlet app
that does the mchealthy combo
optimization but basically here's what
you need to know i'm using a library
called pulp pulp that is a linear
program python library that lets you set
up these types of linear optimization
problems this section of the code right
here is where i set up that linear
problem inside of pulp in python you can
pause the video kind of read through
what i did it is a little too much
complicated to explain right now in this
short video a good chunk of the rest of
the code is actually just building the
streamlit app which is really easy to
build it's just a couple lines to
basically take in the sidebar to have
the header at the top and to display the
graph kind of on the bottom right hand
side and here is the app you can go to
this url right here to try it out for
yourself but you can see that the
optimal mchealthy combo for me
personally is two apple slices packages
five side salads
five fruit and maple oatmeal with brown
sugar and two large diet dr peppers if i
ate that for the whole day that would be
a total of thirteen 70 calories and that
is how i can hit my macronutrient goals
in the least amount of calories the
healthiest way by going to mcdonald's
for all three meals so i'm kind of
hungry let's go test this out hi yeah i
was doing some research on what the
healthiest stuff here is
so i was wondering if i could have do
you guys have a side salad
could i have
uh an oatmeal done
uh do you guys have apples
okay i'll have to think of apples as
well as a large now we'll just make it a
small diet coke thank you
so i hope you guys enjoyed this project
this was day 28 of building 30 days
science projects in 30 days and i have
all of the code available for free for
you guys in the description down below
there'll be a link that says resources
just click there
if you enjoyed this video go ahead and
hit subscribe so you can see more
projects thanks for watching bye

Title: Implementing Data Quality in Python w/ Great Expectations

Description: In this video, I'll walk you through a short data portfolio project in Python where we tackle data quality with the library GreatExpectations.

We'll be checking the assumptions on my outdoor activity (Strava) data.



This is party of my 30 Data Science Projects in 30 Days series. SUBSCRIBE to see the other 29! 

#python #pythonprojects #datascience

Video Transcript:
we all know that the data scientist role
is the sexiest role of the 21st century
and nothing screams sexy like data
quality am i right
just kidding that is not the sexiest
part of being a data scientist but it is
an important part it is definitely part
of the data life cycle you know your
data quality is really key because
garbage in equals garbage out and so you
really need to make sure you have good
data quality so in this video as day 27
of building 30 data science projects in
30 days we're going to do a project on
data quality we'll be using python
specifically the library great
expectations so you might even be like
me and be like what's the point of data
quality what does it even mean what does
it even entail but this is what great
expectations helps you do it helps you
check assumptions inside of your data
set so for example if you have a data
set that is based on age you have like
an age column right it's going to check
inside of the data set are all of the
ages above zero right because you would
not want negative age it doesn't really
make sense so data quality helps you
ensure that yes all of the ages are
above zero or another example you might
have a temperature data set about the
weather in utah and you can reasonably
assume you can expect that the
temperature would be between negative 15
fahrenheit degrees
to about 125 degrees fahrenheit
somewhere in that range that's where the
temperatures would fall inside of utah
anything above is going to be too hot
and anything below is going to be too
cold and that's what we can expect for a
data set these types of checks help you
know that your data is what it's
supposed to be and i'll be trying to
implement proper data quality using
great expectations on my outdoor
activity data set it's basically
whenever i do a hike a bike a walk a run
i'm recording that in an app called
strava strava keeps track of all these
important stats and metrics like how
fast i'm going the distance i've gone
where i was at stuff like that i'm going
to make sure that there's nothing kind
of weird going on inside of this data
set and i want to ensure that my strava
data is what i expect it to be or should
i rather say what i greatly expect it to
be so i'm going to be using deep note
for this project just easy to type
python in the cloud the first thing i
need to do is install great expectations
so i just pip install it right here next
we're going to make sure that that csv
is uploaded from our file set import
pandas spd and read in the uh csv
as a data frame now i'm showing the
first five rows and let's go through
each of these columns and try to decide
what expectations we should have for
these columns so for example activity id
we can probably hope that that would be
unique activity date obviously nothing
before i was born nothing in the future
as well would probably be pretty
important activity name i'm not sure
what expectations the type there's only
like run hike bike so maybe there's a
set limited here lapse time uh probably
nothing bigger than six hours i did run
a marathon it did take me like six hours
distance that's gonna be hard because
slims i bike uh i don't think i've biked
anything further than 50 miles so that
might be something max heart rate my max
heart rate is like 220 probably so
nothing above that max speed so
unless i'm biking downhill really fast i
probably didn't go over 30 miles an hour
if i'm running i definitely did not go
over like 15 miles per hour and those
are all the expectations i could think
of up top my head so let's figure out
how to turn this into a great
expectation and do it programmatically
via python oh i just found out instead
of using pandas we're actually going to
use great expectations to use the import
of the csv so i'm going to put this up
here
boom instead of pd it's going to be ge
right here now this should be able to
work
there we go did not raise an exception
which means all of these column values
are indeed unique so that is good we are
havoc success is equal to true so we can
go on our expectations were met that's
awesome how about this one is the
activity type either a bike hike walk or
a run so i do that by just saying expect
column values to be in a set i pass in
the column name which is activity type
and set the value set equal to that list
right there gotta spell things right
here and there we go you will see this
did not completely pass i actually have
a lot of stand-up paddle boards i guess
two and a lot of rides and i guess that
is different
than bikes so this did not pass the
expectations and this told me hey
there's something in your data that you
don't necessarily expect which would be
good especially since this is a big data
set it's hard to comb through everything
individually what about this one when my
max speed is between 0 and 12 i'm just
ensuring that that's probably where i am
most the time maybe if i'm biking it
could be a little bit higher so for
instance you can see these results 17 12
18. that's not uncommon for my mountain
bike to go that fast but something like
34 and 31 i really think that's when i
accidentally got in the car and forgot
to turn off strava because that is much
too high of a speed i've never gone that
fast on a bike so that lets me know hey
something's wrong with your data go look
at those values because those actually
aren't really the quality that you want
so i think you get the idea basically
great expectations just test your data
for you and make sure your data quality
is where it's supposed to be i think
this project and this type of analysis
would be good for any portfolio when
you're trying to get an etl role or some
sort of data science role where you need
to build pipelines because this is
really built to make sure that your
pipeline data quality is high if you
want another project that i think would
look good for etl extract transform and
load and data pipelines in general check
out this video right here i use cape
boola to make a pretty cool pipeline i
hope you guys enjoyed this video i'll
see you tomorrow

Title: How I‚Äôd Use Data Science To Launch a Business

Description: In this video, I'll show you how I'd use data science to help start an Amazon FBA business. We'll get the data from Amazon and analyze the product prices & reviews. 

‚≠ê Get web data from Bright Data: https://brightdata.com



This is part of my series 30 Data Science Projects in 30 Days. SUBSCRIBE TO WATCH THEM ALL! 

#BrightData #datascienceproject #webscraping

Video Transcript:
i've recently decided i'd like to start
another business and all these cool
youtubers keep saying amazon products
can do really well so i'm trying to
learn more and in this video i'm going
to show you how i'd use data science to
start this business as effectively as i
possibly could this video is sponsored
by bright data but more on them in a
minute so there are thousands of
products available on amazon you can
find nearly anything on that site i
swear so what is the product that i
would be interested in but would also do
well well some of you guys may have
noticed that i actually wear gloves in
some of my videos or this brace or even
this brace i actually sleep with this
one that's because i struggle with
arthritis i'm constantly typing on my
computer all day every day and so i wear
these to help prevent wear and tear on
my wrists and prevent carpal tunnel only
one problem i don't even love these at
all like i don't even really like them
i'd like to explore if i could start a
risk love or risk brace company on
amazon but before i go out and spend
thousands of dollars on inventory i want
to do some data analysis to find out
things like how much money i could make
or what the current solutions are
missing or what are the like the
positive and negative reviews and stuff
like that so i first need to find data
and unfortunately i don't think i'm
going to find any of this data on kaggle
so i need to make this data set myself
and this means i need to web scrape now
if you've never webscraped before this
is what you have to do you have to like
right click inspect study the html
meticulously to make sure you understand
the pattern of how the website is built
and how it's used you then use something
like python library beautiful soup to
collect and parse through that complex
html and that is a ton of code and a ton
of work and on top of that if amazon
makes even one change the way their
website is displayed even if it's just
like a name change you're going to have
to figure that out first of all figure
out what changed and then change your
entire code in fact many websites do
this on purpose now to prevent you from
web scraping they have random element
names that change every two to three
weeks to try to prevent this behavior
let's just say that somehow you wrote
this awesome code and it works great and
it's pretty common for websites to
realize that you are webscript and
they're like oh you're a web scraper we
don't like you and i'll shut off your
access so bam you're blocked and your
whole code you wrote you spent all that
time for nothing all this is why bright
data exists they've already built these
web scrapers for common applications
like amazon so i don't even need to
write any code i only need to input my
product name and bam within seconds
they've literally scraped dozens of
amazon listings without me being blocked
at all and it gives it to me in this
awesome csv and all of that took like 15
seconds it was really quick and amazon
data is just one example of what brad
data can do they can actually do a lot
of different things for instance they
can help you get data off of crunchbase
off of google maps off of walmart
there's so much they can do and you can
contact them if you have a particular
use case from there i can bring my csv
into my analytics tool of choice and in
this case it's going to be a deep note
notebook where i can do further analysis
there and for example i want to do three
things with this data i want to make a
histogram of the prices i want to go
ahead and tease out those reviews and
give each review a sentiment based on
like the review is it positive as a
negative review stuff like that and
three i want to find the most common
words used in these reviews so i can
figure out what they like and what they
don't like to try to improve and make a
product so let's dive into this and get
technical now i uploaded that amazon
search product csv inside of deep note
and you can see this is what it looks
like basically we have the product name
the product url the current price the
price of the actual product so this is
basically showing discounts right here
so for instance this product is usually
25 but it is on sale right now for about
17 the primary image all of the images
the page ranks where it actually appears
on the page whether it's sponsored or
not the asin how much inventory that
they have listed uh the currency some
dimension information the brand name
weight timestamp of the scrape
availability delivery dates which could
be interesting seeing when you can get
these possibly delivered to your door
but the thing i was most excited about
was the reviews and basically these are
a column of a bunch of reviews for those
individual products so that'll be a
focus of my study and by the way just as
a side note i chose to use deep note i
chose to use python as my way to analyze
the data but you could have chosen excel
you could have chosen power bi tableau
whatever you're most comfortable in i
just knew that i was most comfortable in
python so i selected that as my
technical tool so one of my goals was to
create a histogram of the current price
so i was able to do that by just passing
in the data frame and saying i wanted
the current price and using plotly
express this created this very
simplistic histogram right here but it
gives me a feel that the products are
selling for you know lower than 28
dollars
and higher than six dollars somewhere in
between there we do kind of have like
this buy
uh modal thing going on a little bit but
really most of the chunk of of this data
set is in the
what looks to be like the 14
to the 22 dollars so it gives me a feel
that my product can compete somewhere in
this range and probably still remain
profitable next i wrote some code that
would go through the reviews for each
individual product and pull out the
actual reviews and put it inside of nltk
which is basically a python library that
allows you to do really cool text things
for instance sentiment analysis so
that's what i've done right here is i've
now taken all the reviews from all these
different products so you can see that
these are all from the same product i've
pulled out the review what they're
actually saying in this particular case
i'm a licensed massage therapist
specializing in deep tissue massage
today i've performed around 4 200
massages blah blah blah blah stuff like
that and then the sentiment score of
that particular review now this is a
very basic algorithm i did not write
this algorithm i used the built-in
sentiment an analyzer from nltk so its
mileage may vary but basically you can
kind of see here is the review this is
the sentiment score that i gave it
the closer to one the more positive it
is the closer to negative one the more
negative it is and closer to zero the
more neutral it is so you see this
little histogram at the top and see that
the majority are really are good reviews
people do like the majority of these
products so i'm not going to go through
and bore you guys and show you guys all
the different sentiment scores and the
reviews but just know as a business
owner this would be really useful to be
able to get the reviews kind of from a
bird's eye view try to see the positives
try to see negatives try to see the
bigger picture when it comes to this
market niche i then ran this little code
cell which basically took all the
reviews combined them together and found
the most common words a lot of these are
pretty obvious like space it's pretty
common eye and stuff like that gloves
have of course we can kind of move on to
try to figure out you know maybe some
least less common words so pain was a
big one compression was a big one fit
work
hands stuff like that so basically we we
can get an idea of what words
comfortable arthritis these are some of
the buzzwords that are going to be
useful when we're coming up with our
copy running ads you know putting our
description we want to hit on some of
these words because that's what people
are talking about inside of these
reviews and why they like them or don't
like these products and there you have
it that is how i'd make some data driven
decisions about starting an amazon based
business this was part of my 30 data
science projects in 30 days series you
can check out some of the other videos
in that series up here thank you so much
for watching thanks to bright data for
sponsoring this video bye

Title: Data Analyst Tableau Project | Gun Background Checks in USA

Description: 

In today's video, I use Tableau to create a data analyst portfolio project about gun background checks in America. This data set has all of the states and the number of background checks they've done for the past 20 years.

This project would be great for anyone trying to break into data analytics, and is part of my series of doing 30 projects in 30 days! 

If you enjoyed, please subscribe :)

#Tableau #DataAnalyst #dataviz

Video Transcript:
in this video I'm going to show you how
to create an awesome data analyst
portfolio project that will look great
when you're applying to any sort of data
analytics job we'll be using Tableau to
analyze a really interesting data set
about gun background checks in the
United States this project will look
best when you're applying to data
analyst jobs or business intelligence
jobs or data visualization jobs wherein
the requirements they say something
about dataviz dashboarding Tableau power
bi spot fire looker those types of
things I think we can all admit the US
has some sort of a gun problem I don't
really want to make this video political
at all instead I just want to show you
this interesting data set that I found
and create some awesome data
visualizations with it you might not
know this but before you purchase a gun
in the United States the cashier
actually calls an agency to do a
background check on the customer to see
if they're eligible to buy a gun or not
in the last 20 years over 100 million
checks have been done and there's
actually been 700 000 purchases that
were prevented because of these checks
so in this video I'm going to show you
three different graphs that I created
that kind of highlight the story of
background checks for gun sales but
first I want to tell you where I got
this data this data set is actually a
pretty cool one and I found it inside of
my course data science project Studio
inside of there there's something there
called the million data set catalog
where I basically scour the internet
high and low and found the coolest and
the best data sets and organize them all
ready for your access the course not
only includes this awesome catalog of
data sets but a bunch of tutorials
that'll help you make awesome data
science projects that'll help you get
hired there's a link in the description
down below if you want to learn more
okay but this particular data set is
actually published every month by the
FBI in a PDF format and BuzzFeed
actually out of all the people created a
parser for these PDFs and now holds the
database where it's basically just a CSV
from the last 20 years so we'll go ahead
and download that data set that's hosted
on GitHub and populate inside of Tableau
the data set basically looks like this
you have a month and a year on the left
hand column the state the number of
permits the permit rechecks and then a
bunch of different categories like
handgun long gun multiple uh all this
pre-pawn Redemption Redemption returned
stuff like that I basically am just
paying attention to the totals at the
end which is going to be a comprehensive
number of background checks per state
per month now there's lots of different
ways you could take this data set and
analyze it and slice it and dice it and
present it in a meaningful way for me I
was interested in seeing how these
background checks changed over time so
I'm really focused on the time series of
it all also location like for instance
what state is checking the most and what
state is checking the least so that's
primarily where my mind will be and why
I made these graphs so the first graph I
made is just basically a bar chart a
horizontal bar chart with the states
going down the y-axis and then the
totals of the actual gun checks over all
of the years on the x-axis and you can
see that Kentucky leads with 50 million
checks over the 20 years note I did make
this descending by the total number of
the sums I added the sum as a label to
all of this and I also did a coloring so
the darker blue the more uh gun checks
are actually worse this is the first
graph that I made Kentucky is first and
we'll actually see y here in a second if
we check back in in buzzfeed's GitHub
repo we'll say that the PDF contains
important notes and caveats it's a good
idea to read these before diving in
specifically you can see right here
um
Kentucky runs a new check on each
concealed carry license holder each
month so that means you know every time
that someone has a concealed carry
license Kentucky's running a new check
on them every single month since 2014.
so that's why you see Kentucky in first
probably because they're doing monthly
checks on their concealed weapons
holders next I made this stacked area
chart and basically we're going to have
the month as the x-axis and the sum
totals as the y-axis and we're adding
the state as the colors and the labels
and what this basically does is it's
just a line chart for each one of these
things
over time and so that gives us an
overall view you know you can see as
time has gone on the totals for the
country as a whole have gone up but you
can see individually that these lines
get thicker these areas get thicker and
that represents that particular State
getting bigger as well
so for example we see Kentucky's now a
big part Illinois is a big part and this
is just kind of interesting because it
lets you compare state to state over
time now with 50 different colors it
gets a little bit too hard to actually
compare that's why this graph isn't
necessarily the best graph to display
this but I still thought it was pretty
interesting I like area charts and I
thought this kind of looked like like
different like sand layers you make when
you're a kid or you know different
layers of the Earth or something like
that so I left in I thought it was
interesting it basically lets you see
proportions and totals and how they
change over time of the last 20 to 30
years and lastly I created this map that
basically has the darker red the more
checks that actually occurred and I put
paid the month in the pages section
which allows you to kind of get like
this animated view of how things change
you know you can go one at a time and
see these numbers change so I have the
sum of the totals as a color I have the
state name and I will as well have the
sum of the totals as a label you can
kind of see as we click to the right how
these numbers change over time or you
can grab this Dot and kind of move it a
little bit more quickly there is some
like big big ups and downs so for
instance Kentucky you see kind of
growing right there Utah had a bunch
those particular months it is
interesting there doesn't be like some
seasonality in between it I don't know
if that's like a January like New Year
thing or something like that that would
be something for you guys to dive into
and check the months something I didn't
really do but I thought this was pretty
interesting you know especially like
Illinois recently like look at that that
is a lot in the last little bit in
Illinois almost a million happening in
Illinois so we want to dive into that
and try to understand why that's
happening as well so hopefully you have
some good starting points to contain to
take this project and put it somewhere
new make it your own and you know add to
it add better analysis because once
again I'm doing Third Day science
project in 30 days so I can't spend a
ton of time on each project but
hopefully this gave you a good idea and
inspiration to do your own so that
concludes this project once again this
was part of 30 days science projects in
30 days you can get the entire tab low
data as well as the workbooks in the
link in the description down below the
resources link to make this on your own
and take it to the next level I
appreciate all you guys for watching if
you enjoyed this project you'll also
enjoy these projects please watch them
guys I think they're good see you
tomorrow bye

Title: Data Scientist Project | Regression in R to Analyze Health Data

Description: Come make a data science project that would look great on your data analytics portfolio! We'll find data for medical bills, and create a linear regression machine learning model in R to be able to predict how much a medical bill will cost given. 



This is part of my series of doing 30 data science projects in 30 days. Subscribe if you find it useful!

Video Transcript:
data science projects are the secret to
breaking into the data fields and in
today's video we'll go ahead and do a
walkthrough of a project that would look
great on your portfolio and potentially
help you land a job a big part of life
is insurance and insurance companies
charge individuals premiums based off
some basic information of who they are
where they live and what they do now
they have this problem that if they
charge too much they're going to lose
customers but if they don't charge
enough they're going to go out of
business and be bankrupt so in this
project we'll use r to create a
regression model that will be able to
predict how much a given customer's cost
for the medical bill for the year might
be based on some generic features like i
said i think this would be a great
project if you're trying to land a data
science job especially in the risk and
insurance space or maybe even like the
financial space and it'll be great
practice for anyone else who's watching
so let's go ahead and get into it so i
found this data set inside of kaggle
kaggle's one of my go-to resources for
finding good data sets but if you want
access to a million more data sets i
suggest checking out data science
project studio i'll have a link in the
description down below but for this
particular data set we basically have a
bunch of rows each row represents a
human and that humans characteristics
are listed in the column so for instance
this person is 26 years old hey i'm 27
male hey i'm a male uh their bmi is 20
my bmi is a little bit higher they have
zero children they're not a smoker and
they're located in the southwest and
their medical bill for this year was 2
302 dollars now it's not what they paid
necessarily that's how much they owed to
hospitals and they probably paid a
fraction for it but also the health
insurance also probably paid so we are
going to take all these characteristics
to the left here their age their sex
their bmi number of children if they're
a smoker or not and the region they're
in and we're going to try to use those
to be able to predict what the hospital
charges might be for a given year so
that way the insurance companies can
come up with a good premium so they
don't lose money but they also don't
charge too much as well so the first
step is going to be downloading that
data set from kaggle just press the
download button and then open up rstudio
that's we'll be using for our analysis
today in outside of rstudio we basically
just need to read in the csv so we do
that using the read.csv
function call it a data frame and what i
did right here was i just found all of
the numeric columns by using this
command right here i had to google this
just copy and paste it and then i
plotted all of the numerical columns
against each other so specifically i'm
interested in looking at the charges
that's how much people are getting
charged by the hospitals right and then
seeing how that that differs with age so
for example uh over here you'll see
kind of like as you get older on the
y-axis what the charges are on the
x-axis or we can reverse it you know
here are the charges on the y-axis
and here are the ages on the x-axis so
you can see that there's like general
trends the older you get
uh the more expensive the bills get but
there's like kind of like three regimens
which is really interesting right we
could also look at that against bmi um
once again there's kind of like two
unique blobs sort of interesting and
then looking at the children i thought
it was actually interesting if you have
five children i mean this isn't a huge
sample size but the charges actually are
on the lower end which was which was
interesting so anyways i'm just plotting
to try to understand what this data set
might look like and how the
relationships might be this is part of
my explanatory data analysis or eda so
i'm continuing to do that right here by
taking these correlations and these
correlations were not super high like
0.3 and 0.2 that's not necessarily super
high there's also a lot more columns
right there's also the smoker the sax
and the region columns as well so i
looked at those and i made these box
plots basically these box plots are
showing the uh charges on the y-axis and
then the different categories on the
x-axis so if you are a smoker you can
see that the average is much higher for
the charges so that's going to be
important and play into our model
looking at the sex it looks pretty
similar there's definitely you know a
higher quartile up here for the males
than there is for the females but the
averages look pretty similar um
obviously the quartiles over here are
are a lot bigger as well and then
there's the region and there is some
like for instance the southeast so think
about it that's kind of like the south
of the united states definitely seems
like the average is a little bit higher
that q1 is a little bit higher
definitely has a little bit more of a
concentration up here
maybe the southwest as well has a little
bit different i don't know but look at
that bar is quite a bit lower than those
two so region does look like it plays a
role as well once again just exploring
right now i'm going to create a linear
model here in a second and all of these
like factors and information is
important for me to know when i'm making
this linear model and then i use linear
regression to basically be able to
predict the charges using all of the you
know the x's that we had before
this is why i love r is it's really easy
to do this and then i just called the
summary of the model so r does a great
job at putting the category because
there's categorical data right it's not
just numeric data so it does these dummy
variables does that all for us but
basically what we can look at here is
our r squared value is about 0.75 so
that means 75 of the variance of the
charges can be explained by this model
which is actually pretty good
that's a good r squared value and you
can see what variables are you know the
most influential by looking at the
probability right here so for instance
the age is really important
the male the sex is not important that
is not significant uh factor the bmi is
definitely the children does play a role
for sure
the smoker very significant
the northwest is not significant but the
south east and the southwest are
significant but not a ton so really
we're looking at if they're a smoker the
children their bmi their age and then of
course the intercept which actually
includes the remaining dummy variables
as well so basically we proved that yes
you can make a prediction model based
off of bmi age gender location to try to
predict how much a hospital bill is
going to be for a given person in a year
no i mean not completely it's 75 percent
of the variance is explained that's a
pretty solid model it's not an entirely
you know say soundproof model but it's
going to give a ballpark for these
insurance companies to be able to
predict based off of like oh i'm a male
i'm 27. you know i live in the southwest
i guess i live in utah i just call that
the west but um you know my bmi is like
26 or something like that
how much am i going to cost the hospital
you know what what can the insurance
company expect to have a burden for me
the answer for last year was like
maybe 200
this year i cut my thumb that was like
500 something like that so anyways this
is an interesting project i hope you
guys enjoyed it if you did please go
ahead and check out the code and the
data in the link in the description so
you can recreate this project i also
have 29 other projects that basically
you can recreate on your own and please
subscribe to the channel it means a lot
to me it keeps me motivated and it helps
other people like you find the channel
i'll see you guys tomorrow bye

Title: Easy Bar Chart Race Animation Tutorial

Description: In this video, we dive into how to create a animated bar chart race chart using Flourish. In less than 5 minutes, I'll show you how to find a time series data set, transform it, and make an awesome racing bar chart graph. 



#datavisualization #racingbarchart #dataviz

Video Transcript:
i love these types of charts they're
called animated bar charts and in this
video i'm going to show you how you
could recreate this with your own data
in less than five minutes there will be
three main steps finding the data
transforming the data and then creating
the visualization this is all thanks to
flourish it makes it really easy to do
this they do not sponsor this video but
flourish if you're watching let's do
some future videos we're actually going
to do this in reverse order so we're
going to start with the graph first so
open up a browser and go to
flourish.studio make an account it is
absolutely free although i will say your
data will be public so if you have
sensitive data maybe don't do this once
you're logged in click on new
visualization and you'll be able to
choose from quite a bit right here we're
going to be looking for race okay that
is the line chart race i have another
video on that here is the bar chart race
we're going to go ahead and select the
bar chart race which has already data
pre-populated in it so you've actually
technically already created your first
animated bar chart race right here i
think this is by population of the
different countries inside the world
against time if i'm not mistaken this is
a pretty cool visualization but it's not
the one that you guys probably want to
make so let's go ahead and try to find
some data and then we'll transform it
for this data set you're going to want
to be a time series with groups so in
this case the groups are the countries
and obviously up here we have the time
series finding your own data set can
prove difficult i recommend checking out
kaggle.com they have a lot of data sets
there but if you want the best resource
for finding your data set check out in
the description there will be a link to
something called data science project
studio this is my course on how to make
the best projects possible and inside of
that course i have something i like to
call the million data set catalog where
i basically found the best data sets all
across the internet and have them
already up there for you for your access
categorized i think countries end up
working well for this data set countries
against time right i've seen with
internet browsers against time i've seen
one with stocks against time just some
ideas for you so the data set i'll be
using for this demo is from who it's the
coronavirus covet 19 data basically i
went to the data download and i was just
able to download all the different
countries time series of how kovit has
affected their countries and this is
what that data set looks like it
basically has the date the country and
then the new cases cumulative cases new
deaths and cumulative deaths now you
might have noticed that this actually
looks quite a bit different than this
and specifically it's mostly transposed
and pivoted where this has the years as
columns this data set comes with it as a
row and that's going to be the case for
most of the data that you're going to
find i don't know why flourish wants the
date to be the columns i don't really
get it but that's the way flour sets it
up so we need to do our second step
which is to transpose the data so to
reemphasize basically we're going from a
very tall table to a very wide table and
to do this transformation you can use
lots of different tools i originally
tried google sheets but i kind of got
stuck i'm not that great at google
sheets or excel so i ended up using this
code inside of python to do that
transformation for me i'll leave it on
the screen you can pause it take a look
also have the code in the description
down below there'll be a link to it and
you can get it for absolutely free so
that way you can use it with your own
projects now you'll go back to flourish
you'll click upload data and find the
new csv that you created i called
mineclained because i can't spell
cleaned hit open hit import then you'll
select the columns you're going to make
the label a and everything else is going
to be values okay also make the
categories a so that the coloring
changes and you don't have any images
you can put some cool images on this
we're not going to do that today from
there you'll go over here and click
preview and that will automatically
preview your graph for you it is already
made so well done now there is a lot of
things that you can do to try to make it
look a little bit better for instance i
don't really think we need the legend so
we can turn that off you can also take
the labels here and add a little bit
more of space so we can actually see
what they they are up here now let's
talk about exporting this because it is
a little bit difficult if you go up here
you can export and publish so for
example you could publish to share and
embed uh basically that means that like
you're going to get a link and an embed
link so like for instance you can send
people to this link right here and say
hey view my graph or you can embed this
on a web page you can also download this
as an image or an html or even add this
to a canva presentation canva recently
purchased flourish you can add it to a
camera presentation
but you cannot really turn this into a
video so how did i turn into a video
well i used camtasia to do a little
screen recording and basically just
cropped it down so use any sort of
screen recording software and that will
help you get this into a video format so
there you go that is how you make a
animated bar chart race if you like this
video maybe check out these ones

Title: Engineering Data Analysis with R (PCA)

Description: In day 22 of 30 days of data science projects. We show how engineers can use PCA (principal component analysis) to troubleshoot their process data and help fix their problem



Video Transcript:
many of you know i haven't always been a
data scientist i actually studied
chemical engineering as my undergrad and
even worked for exxon mobil who is a
huge manufacturing and engineering
juggernaut when i first was breaking the
data i wasn't even really sure how data
could be paired
with manufacturing and engineering i
like didn't even know if it was possible
and i didn't know like what to do to
figure all that stuff out and so in this
video i'm going to show you an example
of how engineers could potentially use
data in their job we'll have a replica
data set with some manufacturing data
that deals with basic raw material
characterization you can think of this
as some sort of like mining facility
data or plastic making or rubber making
data or maybe even like a metal
polishing process data and we'll try to
figure out how to increase the favorable
outcome how to actually make we want to
happen happen
with data this is also part of my series
of doing 30 data science projects in 30
days so it would be a great project that
you could have on your portfolio if
you're trying to transition into the
data field perhaps from the engineering
and manufacturing field by the way if
you want this data and you want the code
that i'm about to write so you can
replicate this project look in the
description down below and you should
find a link where you can get the code
for absolutely free let's get into it so
here's what our data set looks like we
have a bunch of different lot numbers
over on the left hand side and here are
the outcomes in b okay these outcomes
are given by an engineer who has lots of
experience who's done this a lot of
times and basically using the eye test
is able to judge the outcome as either
adequate or poor
next they take six different
measurements size 5 size 10 size 15 tga
dsc and tma these are six different
measurements they take for each one of
the different lots and they basically
test it within those lots and our goal
is to be able to use data to help this
process
come with more adequates for an outcome
and less pores this data in this example
is actually taken from one of my
favorite free resources about all things
data especially when it comes to
engineering it's called process
improvement using data by kevin dunn it
is a free resource it's available at
learnche.org or you can check the
resources section down below i highly
recommend it it is totally free and
today's example comes from that section
in the book about multivariate modeling
so you create a product at this company
but your product is becoming a little
bit worse and you think it might be
because of a key raw material but it
could be your process conditions you're
not sure so you're going to begin by
investigating the raw material supplier
you basically have the data that i
showed you earlier that basically shows
the three different measurements the
first three are the
size values for plastic pellets the
other three are thermographmatic
analysis differing scanning calorimeter
and thermomechanic analysis measured
inside of a lab this is basically
allowing you to adequately characterize
the raw material
um also notice that there's the adequate
rapport that basically reflects the
process engineer's opinion of the yield
that
comes from that lot of material so what
it asks us to do is build a latent
variable model for all observations and
use autofit to determine the number of
components okay if you don't have
autofit use the pareto plot to plot the
number of eigenval values to decide the
number of the components so what we're
going to do with this data set is we're
going to try to study it and try to
figure out how can we get more favorable
outcomes and we're going to be using
something called pca or principal
component analysis now i don't have time
to dive into the nitty-gritty of pca
i'll let you use this awesome resource
that we know we're using the process
improvement using data or check out
statquest josh starmer has a great video
on pca like the actual nitty gritty of
it we're going to be using pca and r to
evaluate which of these six
characteristics could potentially really
influence whether we have a
adequate or poor outcome i chose to do r
for this analysis no real reason other
than i want to get better at r uh you
can do the exact same thing in python i
actually think this is easiest most
easily done using something called jump
jmp from sas but that costs a lot of
money unless you have a license at your
company i think it's one of the best
people that do it so we're just going to
be using r which was more than
sufficient to tackle this problem so the
first thing we need to do is download
the csv and get it uploaded into r i use
that using the read.csv
and then calling it data
next i change the row names which is
basically the index of the data instead
of just having a one two three four i
combine the lot number and the outcome
so that that would basically represent
the index of that particular row within
the data set
the reason i did that was just so that
would be like a little bit easier so you
see how these are combined now it's
going to be a little bit easier when i
actually do the some of the graphing
because it bases it off of the index so
i just that was done by experimentation
i figured out eventually
next i did the principal component of
the
the data inside of the size and the tgas
basically right because we don't we
can't do pca with lot number and outcome
we need numbers for pca so these six
columns were included in the pca we took
the principal analysis of those and did
scale equal to true so that they're all
on a zero mean uh one standard deviation
basis that's one of the steps you need
to do for pca before you get going and
we store that inside of results now next
inside of the challenge you you'll see
that they
asked us to figure out how many
principal components we should be using
the way i did that is right here i found
this formula online this basically shows
uh the percentage of variance that is
captured by each principal component so
44
then 34
and then 14 percent um and the next
one's five percent so we're above ten
percent on all three of these so three
is probably the most appropriate number
um we can also get a hint that three is
probably a good number because in step
two it says interpret component one two
and three separately using the loadings
bar plot
so that's what i've done here is i've
created a uh loadings bar plot that
basically this shows for the first
principal component which once again
captures like 45
of the variants what is the most
important factors
and turns out size you can see that size
is contributing almost equally across
those to the first principal component
the second principal component is the
tga and the tma those values are above
0.4 in magnitude then the third
principal component is the dcs so
basically we have one that represents
the size
the second one represents the tga and
the tma and the third represents the dsc
so those are the three principal
components that we have for this project
we have now shown the bar plot and we've
also decided how many that we need and
the last thing it asks us to do is to do
the score plot and color code based on
the outcome and see you know what's
basically going on with the
contributions
so what that is called actually is
called a biplot and i was able to make
one right here and what this does is it
has the two different score values from
the pc1 and the pc2 and the labels are
shown by the index so you can basically
see what i'm i know it's a little bit
crowded what you're basically going to
see is that there's a bunch of pores
over here on the left hand side poor
poor poor poor poor on the left hand
side then a lot of adequate kind of over
here in the middle okay and if we want
to
have less pores we can see what is
influencing the pores and those are
close to the size arrows so that way we
know that the size arrows basically is
the sizes is what's affecting it and
making it poor it doesn't look like
there's a huge i mean there is a little
bit maybe in the dcs because there is a
little bit of vertical
action but a lot of it mostly looks like
it's on the this the
basically close to these uh size values
basically we could take this graph and
show our boss and say hey look all of
these pores are around the same
direction as the size values so the size
values is what we really have to hone in
on so that we make sure that we have
adequate and good outcomes our boss is
going to be so happy going to give us a
million dollar raise and we can ride off
into the sunset and by the way if you
want to do more data science projects i
would suggest checking out these two
videos right here and subscribing to my
channel because i'll also give you a
million dollar raise

Title: Data Visualization Portfolio Project with Tableau | Ken Jee Data

Description: In Day 21 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days, I take on a challenge issued by data science YouTuber @KenJee_ds. I try to analyze his own YouTube data, better than he can.

I built him a dashboard in Tableau that he can use to explore his data and make better decisions when it comes to video titles & content.



SUBSCRIBE IF YOU LIKE DATA :0

See you tomorrow with another project!

Video Transcript:
my mortal enemy ken g challenged me to
see if i could analyze his data better
than he could i want to find out if you
avoid analyze my data better than i can
for the first time ever i'm creating a
community project on kaggle i thought
it'd be fun to publish some real data my
own youtube data in fact and see what
everyone comes up with challenge
accepted and spoiler alert i created the
world's best project for ken g i built
this awesome tableau public dashboard
that basically shows all of his youtube
stats on one page but let me show you
how i actually made it so i started by
going where ken g had his data which is
on kaggle.com i've used kaggle quite a
bit in this series hopefully you're
familiar with kaggle basically he gave
us some context up here he's been trying
to make good data science videos since
november of 2017
and he wants to basically give the
community a project help everyone
understand the growth of my youtube
community and think about it ways it can
be improved
so here's some of the things that he was
looking for what are the themes of the
comment data what type of video titles
and thumbnails drive the most traffic
who is his core audience and why are
they interested in
what types of videos lead to most growth
what types of content are people
engaging with or engaged or watching the
longest advanced projects could be
creating a chat bot to respond to common
comments
when like basically it's a common
question
pulling sentiment from thumbnails and
titles and comparing that with
performance data i'd like to add over
time video descriptions video subtitles
actual video data so there's basically
four types of files that he's giving us
um he got this via the youtube api
there's the ad grade metrics by video
aggregated metrics by video and with
country and subscriber status video
performance all time in all comments
okay
basically we have all four of those
right here in the bottom you can go
ahead and select all the columns in
kaggle to basically get a quick preview
of what the data looks like the first
data set we're going to use is the
aggregate metrics by country and
subscriber status sorry mouthful there
we've showed all 15 columns this
basically has multiple video titles so
you see here's the video title here's
the external video id the video length
so these are all going to be the same
them the length going to be the same
then we get to the country codes this is
by country so here's the country code um
it's subscribed that's interesting that
doesn't really make a whole lot of sense
because then we have count per view so
this is how many views they're getting
inside of that country how many likes
were added from there how many dislikes
were added from there uh some users
subscribe from there unsubscribe from
there
the amount that they watch like the
average percentage that they watch the
average watch time
and the number of comments that came
from that country so that's the first
data set we're going to be using so once
again basically each row is a
combination of a certain title in a
certain country the next one is going to
be aggregated metrics by video and
that's going to be just one row per
video notice that this video id is the
same as the others that's how we can
join these two tables we'll have the
title the date was published the number
of comments added the number of shares
wow that is a lot of shares
number of dislikes the number of likes
the subscribers lost the subscribers
gained and then the estimated revenue
basically um so how many rev how much
revenue per 1000 views
is he getting open up tableau public and
import them i've already imported these
two files obviously but if not you can
go to data new data source and since
both these are downloaded from kaggle
right right here you can just hit
download that downloads them as csvs you
can just go ahead and upload as csvs
that's just a text file basically and
choose whatever csv that you're
interested in now how did i make this
dashboard well you'll notice in the top
left corner we have the youtube logo
that is just a
transparent logo that is used via the
image down here let's see image right
and you can resize it and this is just
an image of ken that you can resize
basically i stole that from his youtube
channel i think
then this is actually a giant text that
says ken g's youtube dashboard i use
spaces to move stuff to the right
basically you see that just moved to the
right
and i made the background black so it
has all of this kind of like this black
theme to the background i think i just
clicked on this right here to do so
or maybe somewhere over here can't
remember okay then i have the total
views the views the estimated revenue
the watch time these are all kpis that i
made in a very similar way you of course
need to click on create a new worksheet
this worksheet for instance if we're
going to do total views uh which which
total vids sorry uh that's the number of
videos so for example you go here you
look at total videos and to recreate
what i did open up a new worksheet right
take the video titles put it inside the
text these are all the different video
titles that ken has done and instead of
showing the actual videos you do the
actual count here and there's that value
of 223 right click on it format and you
can change these like
the size of all the text and the stuff
basically inside of here to make it look
like we did here put a black background
add the the name which is instead of
sheet9 total vids we do that for the
estimated revenue the watch hour time
instead of using
count we use the sum there
we use the sum for the estimated revenue
for views we use sum as well but that's
all basically the same once you've made
one you can right click on it and you
can hit duplicate and just change the
numbers to however the fields you want
it to be so that's how you make this
full top bar picture picture text with
the background and then dragging these
individual text things that are right
here onto the page into the top right
corner next we just have a basic
time filter this is pretty easy to add
this time filter is going to be based
off of the dates and it's going to
affect all the visualizations on the
screen so if you want to just look at
like for instance the looks like the
last six months of 2021 you can do so or
if you want to look at the beginning of
ken's you know youtube career you can
kind of see what's going on so i really
like this basic date filter it just
makes things a lot easier to zoom in and
zoom out of certain you know regimens of
ken's career one of the things that ken
wanted us to look at was what gets
clicked on so i created this
click-through rate bar chart which
basically shows the in the impression
click-through rate basically it means
for every 100 people that saw this 11
people clicked on it which might seem
low but it's actually a great
click-through rate okay
so this is basically displaying all the
different click-through rates and the
title of the actual
film so what you see here is i have the
click-through rate sum right here it's
basically just an average in fact we
could change that to average nothing
would change we're adding the video
title um to the rows it's not super
important i don't think let's just try
taking it off hold on let's see
oh it is important
sorry we definitely need that that's
making it go downward okay
then we're adding a annotation that is
the video title as well as we're
coloring by the number of views so
basically if it's really red like you'll
see down here that means it got a lot of
views
so up here even though it says a really
high
um
click-through rate it has very low views
only 60 views i guess at this time
so it doesn't give you that much so it's
kind of interesting to see those how
things are you know click-through rate
versus scene like this basically gives
really interesting outliers so like for
instance this didn't have very good
click-through rate but it had a lot of
views
very interesting right um some other
things that might stand out lots of just
normal stuff right here data certificate
versus boot camp versus master's degree
how i learned data science if i had to
start over the best free data science
courses nova stock it basically just
like makes things stand out which i
think is pretty interesting and we slap
that on our dashboard over here on the
left hand side so you can scroll
all right does that make sense hopefully
it does
next let's move over to the likes versus
subscriber games this is a scatter plot
basically
so what i'm plotting here is just the
subscribers gained from that video
against the likes for that video and one
thing i did here was i actually made
this a logarithmic log
logarithmic
logarithmic there we go logarithmic uh
y-axis so you can see that like it goes
from 200 to 500 to a thousand to 2000
that's just because this is like such a
big outlier so when you have outliers
logs can often uh help it make a little
bit more sense i think to not make it
one you somehow click over here hit edit
axes
and you're going yeah right here
logarithmic turn it off see that just
doesn't look as good as when you turn
the logarithmic on it just like lets you
see things a little bit better
and on the bottom down here i don't
think i have it as logarithmic we could
try clicking on it edit axis
go to logarithmic here and then you get
more of like a scatter plot which is
kind of interesting maybe we'll do that
makes it like a little little easier to
see everything basically um but
i don't know maybe not because i like to
see those other two as outliers because
they really are outliers those are huge
outliers that are are interesting so
basically we can see on this video right
here by the way i have the video title
in the hover how i learned data science
if i do it over again
got 46 000 subscribers which is crazy um
i only got that many likes too okay 10
000 subscribers the best data science
courses nobody's talking about
three data science proven projects for
beginners got a lot of subscribers uh
gained as well so this is just like a
great way to try to like see how the
effects of the video for ken i also made
this subscribers over time graph which
basically shows his cumulative
subscribers over the the days and also
when that video was posted so you see
this is the really big one that we
talked about right uh wait right here at
the top how i learned data science if i
had to start over again 97 000 um
subscribers at the time so we can go
ahead and look at that graph basically
this is just going to be the sum
in the change right yeah so it's the sum
of the sum and the change of the
subscribers so that basically makes it
running right and then we have the uh
video publish time as the uh x-axis and
we also included the video title uh
inside of the hover so you can actually
see what's going on as you hover above
and last we have this watch rate video
now this watch rate video is kind of
complicated basically it's the average
percent viewed so this means you know
100 people finish the video 100
uh this would mean like the average was
in this case 36
and the watch length how many minutes
the video actually is is on the
left-hand side so if you multiply this
times this that would give you the total
watch time for those particular videos
now the size is in the change of
subscribers so this big red one is how i
could learn data science if i had to
start over again but this is kind of
interesting because it lets you see oh
wait the size is that and the color is
that as well i believe right both those
are the same so
unless you just kind of find
interesting big
circles at different times and different
spaces and try to think through why did
this video do well what's special about
this video did this title have an infect
do the people like the topic just like
basically a way to explore this data set
a little bit more visually so hopefully
this video showed you yes i can analyze
data better than kenji if you guys also
want to analyze data better than kenji
i'll give you this entire dashboard that
you could start with have as a starting
point and then build off of all you need
to do is click the link in the
description down below that says
basically get the code and the data and
the resources for this project and
you'll also get it for 29 other projects
because i am doing 30-day science
projects in 30 days this is day 21 or
something like that i've lost track of
it all hope you guys enjoyed if you did
hit subscribe bye

Title: Beginner NLP Data Science Project with Python

Description: In Day 20 of making 30 Data Science Projects in 30 days, I'll do a quick intro data project about NLP (natural language processing). Simply choose a text (I chose the Book of Mormon), and download Python, and follow my template! 

We'll discover what words are used the most, when those words are used, and some other hidden text patterns hidden within. This would be a great data scientist project, especially if you expand upon it. 



IF YOU ARE ON A DATA CAREER JOURNEY, I WANT TO HELP YOU

SUBSCRIBE TO NOT MISS A VIDEO!

#datascienceproject #datascientist #datascience

Video Transcript:
in this video i'm going to show you how
to do an entry-level nlp data science
project nlp stands for natural language
processing so basically we'll be doing
analysis with text data you learn how to
find what words are used the most when
they are used and some other hidden
patterns that lie underneath the data
set and here's what you'll need some
sort of textual data whether it's a book
in this case i'm going to be using a
book it could be a magazine a series of
articles some sort of text file that you
can analyze two you'll need access to
python we'll be doing this project using
python specifically the library nltk
which is awesome for these types of
projects in three thirty minutes i'm
gonna do this demo in less than 10
minutes and then 20 to 30 minutes after
you'll be able to recreate what i did
because i'm giving you my exact code
just check the link in the description
down below i'm going to give you my
exact code that you can basically just
input your text file and recreate the
whole thing you may or may not know this
but i'm an active member of the church
of jesus christ of latter-day saints or
more colloquially known as the mormon
church and i'm super active i go to
church every sunday i've been working
with the teenagers for about three years
now and i even served a two-year church
mission where i was in sweden and i got
to teach people about god and also
render service
we're a christian church so we believe
in the bible but we don't only believe
that god just shocked to people around
the jerusalem area but he also talked to
other people around the world including
people in ancient america and that's
exactly where the book of mormon comes
from it's basically the bible but
instead of the people of jerusalem it's
the people in the ancient americas so i
decided hey this is a pretty interesting
book i want to do some text analysis
with the book of mormon so first you
need to start with your text so i just
searched book of mormon tax file
download clicked on this first link
which is from gutenberg they have a lot
of different books you see right here 68
000 ebooks and i went ahead and
downloaded the plain text file then i
went to jupyter notebook and launched a
new python notebook basically had it
blank i started off by saying what
libraries i needed which in this case
was just nltk this is like the awesome
most best easiest way to do nlp data
just off the gate nltk and i had to
download these two different parts of it
which was punked and the stop words as
well next i just opened up the book of
mormon text file basically using the
open feature in python
i read all of that
as the text into this raw book of mormon
document then i took that document and
passed it into the tokenizer from nltk
and created the find words text book of
mormon object and then i took that and
passed it into the text which basically
is a finished searchable version of the
text and that's all the prep we have to
do now we can actually get to analyzing
the text and learning insights from the
text so the first thing i want to do is
just figure out how many words are in
the book of mormon and turns out there
is about 313
000 words in the book of mormon i found
that by taking the length of basically
the text right next we use a cool nlt
ability which is called count and you
can pass in a phrase or a word so for
instance i passed in the word christ and
you can see how many times that word was
used which is 384 times there's also a
really cool feature inside of nltk
called concordance and basically it just
shows you 25
out of the 386 matches of where christ
was used and it puts christ kind of in
the middle and it takes the x amount of
characters before and the x amount of
characters after so it gives you a feel
for how that word is used so for example
this particular one it says jew and
gentile that jesus is the christ the
eternal god manifesting himself here's
one down here at the bottom and we are
made alive in christ because of our
faith it's like another one but there is
a god and he is christ and he cometh in
the fullness of
one more and after the law is fulfilled
in christ that they need not harden
their hearts so you can kind of get a
feel for how a word is used inside of
the text which i think is pretty cool
you can also do something called similar
which basically says you know what words
are like used similarly to christ i
don't know exactly the algorithm that
goes behind this but if you look at nltk
similar i'm sure you can figure it out
and you see that i got results of god
them nephi men israel it him the
zarahemla you man jerusalem darkness
death all hosts etc etc
another one is like what is commonly
used when jesus christ like when both
these words are used of who
of and of they of nephi of save of it of
whom kind of interesting to see some of
these i like this one that showed that
one was interesting to me i'm like what
what did jesus show that i think that's
really interesting
this is probably my favorite thing that
we can do it's called a dispersion plot
and basically it just shows you how
often a word is used when so i listed
all these different words and basically
each one of these lines represents that
it was used in in that word order this
is kind of like a word order right it's
like for instance you see god has used
almost
almost every word it looks like right
it's used a ton
mercy there's these sections right here
where mercy is said a little bit more
frequently than others like over here
there's a good prayer section it looks
like you know peace has maybe two deeper
sections right there so i think it's
cool you can basically see like when the
book of mormon talks about different
subjects like at different points inside
of the book inside of the frequency
that's actually going to move us next to
the frequency which i'm basically going
to show you the top 25 words
um of course you you want to use
something called stop words to remove
some of these dumb ones like the of and
that to and they are probably going to
be the most common words in almost any
text right but maybe like some ones like
him or there or shall um are some of the
more interesting ones
that came from this frequency and then
lastly i did something called
collocations and basically this is just
like
two word most common phrases that are
said together so said unto say unto holy
ghost thou shout passed away
holy one jesus christ
must needs
these are some common phrases that are
said a lot in the book of mormon so
there you have it a very shallow very
brief introduction to nlp you can
basically take this and turn it into a
project with your favorite text or some
interesting test that would be
interesting to a job you're interested
in or hobby you're interested in
something like that
obviously you can go a lot further in
depth than i did you can check out the
nlt documents they have really good
documentation and really cool examples
to make these awesome nlp projects
really come to life that's all i have
time for today because i am building 30
data science projects in 30 days i think
today is day 21
almost a week left that's it i'm giving
all of my code and all of the data
accessible for these projects so make
sure you click that link in the
description down below make sure you hit
subscribe so everyone knows that you
love this channel and if you want to
keep watching my videos i suggest these
two right here see you later bye

Title: Visualizing Elon Musk's Tweets in Augmented Reality (Data Visualization Project)

Description: In this video, I'll show you how I visualized all of Elon Musk's Tweets from 2021 in augmented reality.  I'll explain when Elon Musk tweets during the day, what he says that goes viral, and how his Tweeting pattern changed throughout the year. 

The tool I used is called Flow Immersive. 

This is day 19 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days.



SUBSCRIBE IF YOU LIKE DATA PROJECT TUTORIALS AND VIDEOS

#datavisualization #datascienceproject #datascience

Video Transcript:
each one of these dots represents one of
elon musk's tweets from the year 2021 so
we can actually go inside of this data
and look around and say wow elon
you have been tweeting quite a bit now i
did add some coloration on these so that
the ones that are red like this one over
here means it got significantly more
likes than the ones that are blue this
is on a gradient scale so the purple is
kind of like an in-between amount okay
and we can actually like add some more
data to all of these tweets by pressing
the next button and that will display
all of this data inside of a cool 3d
scatter plot where we have three
different axes here the y-axis is the
likes count that's the vertical
we have kind of like this width right
here which is going to be the hour that
he tweeted it and then we're going to
have the date over here on the depth
that basically shows the date that he
tweeted it and so with this we're able
to you know see these different tweets
and see elon musk's different tweeting
patterns so for example at the beginning
of the year you see a lot of these red
dots which indicates the likes were
actually quite high and compared to the
rest of the year there's not nearly as
many red dots so at the beginning of the
year elon musk had quite the viral
tweets we do have some towards the end
of the year but not near the amount we
did at the beginning of 2021 and you
might be like well why is this so viral
what is he saying we can go ahead and
click on one of these right here if
there's ever a scandal about me please
call it elongate i guess people really
like that one these are kind of hard to
click with my thumb you're welcome we
have to see what that one's you know in
reference to so it's finally come to
this so i don't know a lot of these are
probably memes and images but the point
is we can see
okay he was a lot more viral at the
beginning of the year than he was at the
end of the year and of course that he
tweets a lot now let's go ahead and see
if we can see
what like days or like or the month or
what months he was most viral or most
active you can see he actually tweeted
more as the year went on like you can
see there's a lot more blue dots down
here
or maybe maybe especially like the month
of june
or sorry july and august there's a lot
of blue dots versus in like april and
may there's not a whole lot
um not a whole lot in in february and
march as well so i think he tweeted more
as the year went on
and especially like the middle of the
year
and maybe had a little less viral tweets
or at least
less red which means the like count was
up we can also look at the hour of the
day that he tweets so if i come over
here and we're just going to try to look
at the hour of the day
we have from midnight to midnight right
we can try to analyze when elon tweets
during the day like so for instance one
thing i noticed on the right hand side
that's going to be from like 8 o'clock
to midnight there's actually some pretty
big gaps at the beginning right here
right where he's not actually tweeting
at those night hours but eventually he
starts he does start to
tweet in those night hours down here
and it's more this afternoon hours
to have those big gaps where he's not
tweeting
the other crazy thing that i thought was
interesting was how much he is tweeting
from like midnight to like 3 a.m 5 a.m
like all the stuff over here on the
left-hand side there's actually like a
decent amount so really in the afternoon
it looks like he's tweeting less i guess
that means he's probably working versus
the rest of time he's just chilling or
something like that
but this is basically all of elon musk's
tweets visualized in 3d augmented
reality looking at the likes count the
hour and the date of the tweet with the
colors representing the colors and the
size here represent the like count so
i'll show you now how i made this in
less than 10 minutes by the way my name
is avery smith and i'm building 30-day
science projects in 30 days so when i
decided i wanted to do this project i
had to think about where i was going to
get elon musk tweets data and of course
we could have gotten it from the twitter
api but i thought you know what why do
so much more work when i'm building 30
day science projects in 30 days i need
every shortcut i can get so i decided to
start with a data set from kaggle that
basically had all of his tweets from
like the past 10 years next i know i
wanted to do this in augmented reality
and the best tool for doing augmented
reality data visualization is called
flow immersive i like the team at flow
immersive i love their product i've
actually been using it in a little bit
of consulting believe it or not and they
have very cool way to tell these data
stories in augmented reality so i signed
up for an account there you can get a 30
day free trial or you can pay 20 a month
which is actually cheaper than tableau
if i'm correct so it's actually a pretty
good deal if you ask me here's what the
editor looks like from the inside this
is basically like tableau meets
powerpoint so you have like slide one
and then here's slide two right that we
saw
um and basically you have different uh
graph elements right here so i have
what's called a swarm and this swarm is
just a random chart so that's why it's
just a random one meter by one meter by
one meter cubed where i have the dot
sizes at 10 and i have a gradient scale
based on the likes of the tweets you
upload your data up here you see that
i've loaded the data just as a csv
and
then i added a little text that's the
elements tweets and then from here the
data remains the same but instead of
doing a random chart i'm doing a scatter
plot and that scatter plot has three
different dimensions the width the
height and the depth
the width is the date so there's the
date over there the height is the likes
and then the depth is the hour and
here's the depth and i once again uh
this one i actually made five by one by
one so that the dates go out longer um
you could make you could make this any
size you know
um i once again have the colors and the
sizes according to
the tweets and then i also added
basically an interaction that when you
rolled over it would show you the tweet
the likes count the retweets count the
date and the time so for instance if i
roll over one of these with my mouse you
can see my 14 year old saxon says he
feels like 2021 will be a good year i
agree let's all make it so that got it
looks like 892
000 likes
61 000 retweets and that was on january
9th 2021 at almost 11 p.m at night and
so that works for you know any of these
tweets you can try to dive in and
understand them a little bit more if you
enjoyed this video please hit the like
button i'll give you the code and the
data for this particular project and 29
other data science projects that i'm
building in this challenge check out
these two other projects that i did i
think you'll enjoy them i'm leaving now

Title: Weekly Community Data Science Projects (Tidy Tuesday)

Description: What if there was a new data project challenge for you to do every week. Well there is! It's called TidyTuesday and it is supported by the R for Data Science Online Community. Basically, it's a data set + prompt every week for you to come up with something unique and share with the community.

And in this video, I'll show you how to get started, and walk you through an entire data science project where we take in data from The Office about character personalities, clean and process the data, and make a beautiful data visualization using R. 



SUBSCRIBE FOR 30 DATA ANALYTICS PROJECT TUTORIALS! 

#rstats #datascienceproject #datascientist

Video Transcript:
one of the hardest parts of doing data
science projects is coming up with the
idea you can spend hours trying to find
an interesting project find good data
and thinking what type of analysis to do
it can also be really lonely both of
these reasons is why i built my course
data science project studio which helps
you find access to people building
projects and helps you build projects
much faster and one of the resources in
that course is something called tidy
tuesday tidy tuesday is a weekly data
project put on by the r for data science
online community where basically every
week they issue a new challenge that
tests your ability to load data into r
analyze that data and create a
meaningful graph all in a weekly
challenge every single week and so in
this video i'm going to walk you through
my first tidy tuesday challenge i
created this graph right here which
basically shows you different
personality traits of main characters
from the television show the office this
data set was really fun to work with and
i can't wait to show you and i'm going
to show you how to do everything that i
did to create that graph and enter this
challenge but first i want to say this
is a video from my series 30 day science
projects in 30 days where i do something
that no other data scientist has done
before and that is build 30 data science
projects in 30 days hence the name right
makes sense we just crossed the halfway
point which means i have 15 plus
projects that you can get access to the
data the code all for free the tutorials
just click the link in the description
down below and that'll take you to my
site which basically has all the
resources that you need to recreate
these projects and build an awesome
portfolio and just to emphasize tidy
tuesday is a weekly social data project
in r basically they're trying to help
you understand how to summarize arrange
and make meaningful charts and it's
heavily supported by the r and data
science community if you go to the
twitter explore section and type in tidy
tuesday you're going to get all sorts of
visualizations with the tidy tuesday
hashtag explaining what they did how
they made these visualizations taking on
their take of this week's challenge or
maybe a previous challenge as well you
can go through these for hours and get
really inspired get cool ideas and even
get some really great code snippets so
back in the official tidy tuesday github
repo if you scroll all the way down to
the bottom you're going to get the data
sets which basically have the challenge
data as well we can click on 2022 to
make sure we are in the right year
scroll down to the bottom here and we
will find this week's challenge which
was from august 16th click on this right
here and basically it has a readme
explaining everything this data set is
coming from the open source
psychometrics project and this is a
really cool project in a really cool
data set basically what it is is a huge
list of all these different movie
characters or television characters from
all these different shows like game of
thrones bob burgers westworld etc and
their personality characteristics so
using the snippet right here i was able
to load in the data into our studio and
this is what it looks like we have the
characters data frame which basically
has all these different characters
monica and rachel and chandler from
friends how notable they are a link to
their picture a link to their stats but
also the second data frame which
actually has the individual stats so for
instance this is kind of a
hard hard data frame to work with but
you have monica geller you know how neat
is she she got a score of 95.7 which
indicates that she is really neat um we
can kind of go down and look you know at
some more of her personalities you know
is she a builder people voted 76 that
she is a builder and i think that this
uh rating goes from zero to a hundred
and there are so many rows you can just
see 356 000 rows of data so lots of
attributes for lots of different
characters so my thought was to look at
these different characters and look at
their personality traits and kind of
compare and contrast and now i thought
about doing that from people from
different worlds to maybe like compare
joey from friends with dwight from the
office with you know peter parker from
marvel or something like that but i
ended up just choosing the office
because i just love the office and for
simplicity's sake obviously i'm doing 30
day science projects in 30 days it takes
a lot of work sometimes we just have to
do simple as better finish each day's
project but you can go and make this as
cool or as complicated as you want but
i'll show you what i did to create this
office chart that basically shows you
know the different personalities of
people from the office and how they
compare and contrast first inside of r
we're going to get the libraries that we
need we need dipler tidy verse showtex
actually i'm not sure if we need that
one gg radar and scales and this will be
for our visualization this will be for
our data manipulation
next we're going to read in that data
like i showed you earlier that was from
the github basically we're accessing the
tidy tuesday section this particular
project and getting the characters data
and the stats data
after that we're doing all of our data
manipulation i have that in one cell
i'll basically go through each line and
tell you what's going on we're taking
these stats and we're filtering it by
the office because that's that's what i
wanted to focus on was the office
television show so instead of having a
huge data set we're going to just narrow
it down to the office from there we're
going to choose some traits that we're
interested in because you know if we are
to look at the office i can open that up
over here the office has like jim halper
has like dozens and dozens of attributes
we're still we're at 180 and still jim
halper
so we're gonna choose some and you can
see some of these are so weird like
prestigious or is he one-faced or
two-faced is he this emoji or that emoji
some of these are super stupid i think
so i just went ahead and simplified it
to playful opinionated awkward emotional
dramatic playful again oops i guess i
don't need playful twice right
flirtatious bold and trusting and the
reason i chose these is i actually went
through
and i did this with r of course but
found you know which ones were the most
common in all of our characters because
for instance jim might have playful but
dwight might not have playful so that is
a little bit troublesome and we'll get
to that here in a bit so i went through
and took the office data frame and made
the office small data frame which is
filtering where the personality is one
of these so we're basically making you
know you can see over here we went from
6 000 rows to 95 rows so really bringing
the number of rows down quite a bit
then from there what we're going to do
is only keep the important columns so we
just want the character name the
personality and the average rating there
are some extra columns we don't really
care about those columns we just need
the name what the personality is and
what the rating is
right and then from there this is where
things get a little bit tricky because
for instance and i don't really know
where these are necessarily but jim had
multiple like playful values so i just
got rid of duplicates based off of the
name and personality and just kept the
first one assuming that they were pretty
much the same that might not be the best
assumption but it was the easiest
assumption at this point
next i pivoted so we went from the
office small which looks like this so
for instance you see jim's all his
traits dwight's all traits pam's traits
their values etc etc but we wanted to
flip this basically pivot it where
instead of having jim be you know
multiple rows we're gonna have jim be
one row with the personalities being the
columns and the ratings being the
intersection or the cells so that's
called a pivot and we're going to use
the wide pivot wider function where once
again the names basically that's going
to be the columns the column names is
the personality and the values are the
average rating and that made comparison
and comparison looks like this so now we
have one row for jim and we have the
different characteristics at the top
playful bold flirtatious and their
values there
but we needed to replace nands so like i
said not every character had every value
and i was trying to like find a set of
values that everyone had but it ended up
just being too hard so we did some data
cleaning here and basically so for
instance if pam for example didn't have
playful
the mean of playful became the value for
pam so we basically replaced nan's with
the column mean that's called imputing
um there's definitely some underlying
assumptions and and you know maybe not
the best assumptions there but that was
one of the easiest things that we could
do for this project to make it look
really nice and then there was just too
many characters so i narrowed it down to
the top one two three four five
characters that i enjoy michael jim pam
dwight and andy and just filtered that
uh comparison down to comparison small
so that way there's only those you know
few rows sorry comparison small here
those five rows of people because the
spider chart the radar chart just gets
really loaded then i used gg radar which
was basically able to create this
beautiful graph which shows you know the
one two three four five six seven eight
eight different personality traits
across five characters and we can see
like some really interesting things so
for instance pam is this purple color
over here and the purple color is pretty
different than the yellow character and
the yellow character is dwight so dwight
is really bold pam's not very bold pam
is very trusting dwight isn't trusting
at all
which is if you've seen the show you
know why dwight's really opinionated pam
not so much
one of the interesting ones is jim i'm
not super sure what happened here if
this is true or not but like jim is
really low on everything except for he's
really playful and pretty flirtatious
which i thought was pretty funny uh andy
not trusting very dramatic very playful
somewhat bold not flirtatious which i
kind of argue he is not very emo or
opinionated very emotional and very
awkward so anyways it's kind of fun you
can do these types of things and make
this type of graph and really try to
understand the characteristics of the
personalities of the office now as
always in the resources section in the
description i'm going to give you access
to this code so you can recreate this
exact same thing but here's some cool
things that you could put your own twist
on okay instead of focusing on focusing
on the office maybe you could focus on a
different television show maybe you
focus on multiple shows maybe you
combine game of thrones and ted lasso
together and do some sort of comparison
you know maybe you take the happiest
people from different marvels
marvel movies i saw someone looked at
heroes so like all the heroes from
different movies and compared and
contrast the personality and you can get
more inspiration by looking on twitter
and seeing what other people have done
and maybe combining what two different
projects did you can go a lot of
different directions with this project
so it's really fun if you enjoyed this
video please look at this playlist over
here it has 30 data science projects
that i did in 30 days and if you really
enjoyed it and you want to see more
videos from me click the subscribe
button right here i appreciate each and
every one of you guys thank you so much
for watching see you tomorrow

Title: Data Scientist Machine Learning Project | HR Analytics

Description: In this video, we'll do an end-to-end data science portfolio project exploring human resources (HR) data. We'll use machine learning classification to create a data model to predict who is likely to stay at a company, and who might quit. 

We'll use AutoML with PyCaret to do our data science work.



ü•ï Learn more about PyCaret: https://pycaret.org

Video Transcript:
hey why does everyone keep quitting the
company what's what's going on i
honestly don't know it seems like a
great company to work for and and you
seem really nice well here's the
freaking data set you have one hour to
tell me why everyone keeps quitting or
you're going to be fired okay well
obviously it's not because how mean of a
boss you are that's for sure not it
can you guys help me save my job over
the next few minutes i need your guys's
help to create some sort of
classification model that's going to be
able to predict whether employees are
going to stay or whether they're going
to leave and what may be the leading
contributing factors to them leaving
please guys you saw how mean that guy
was i really need your help on this one
so it turns out that we actually work
for ibm and that our hr data is already
on kaggle so wow kind of a crazy
experience there but we can go ahead and
look at this kaggle data set i'll have
the link to this data set in the
resources section in the description
down below so definitely click on
resources and i'll take you to a page
drop off your email and then you will
get the code as well as the data so here
is all of the data right here we have
the age attrition now attrition just
means whether they stay with the company
or left the company
how often they have to travel
their daily rate i'm not entirely sure i
guess that's how much they make uh the
department what department they're in
the distance from home their education
um the
i guess how early they were in getting
hired the environment satisfaction the
gender the hourly rate the job
involvement the job level the job role
the job satisfaction marital status
monthly income monthly rate yada yada
over 18 overtime
stuff like that we basically have a
bunch of categories
as well as some numeric values down here
i guess like total working years and
stuff like that we're going to try to
use those to create a machine learning
model that would be able to predict if
someone's likely to stay at this company
or likely to leave this company and
that's basically something called binary
classification we're predicting whether
they're going to be zero they're going
to be staying or one they're going to be
leaving okay that is the project that
we're going to help our guy out so that
they don't get fired so we know we need
to make a binary classification machine
learning model and there's lots of
different ways you can do this you could
build this actually in excel using
logistic regression you could do it in
python you could do it in r you could do
a lot of different combinations and
there's tons of different algorithms as
well and it's hard to know which one
would perform best without doing some
exploratory data analysis but once again
i am doing 30 data science projects in
30 days so i'm a little stressed for
time so we're going to use a tool that's
going to make it really easy to choose
what model to use and that is called pie
carrot i like pie carrot because it is
auto ml basically it helps us create
this model very quickly with just a few
lines of code so we're going to go ahead
and i'm going to show you how to use pi
caret to do a classification model and
actually see how well it would predict
on this data and just because i want to
give the people you guys as much variety
and experience as i possibly can we're
going to be using google collab for
today's ide it is totally free you just
need to go to colab.research.google.com
it is owned by google it's basically a
browser-based cloud-based uh ide that's
very similar to jupiter notebook it's
not my favorite but hey i'm giving you
experience to something that you maybe
haven't seen before so in the first cell
we need to install pi carrot because it
does not come with collabs we're going
to pip install it and we also need to
pip install markup safe place uh markup
safe i don't necessarily know why i just
ran into an error i figured it out on
stack overflow and this fixed my air so
install both of these using pip if
you're in google collab you're going to
add an exclamation in front of it so it
runs to this cloud's terminal basically
while that's installing another thing
that you can do is click on the files
and click on this little guy right here
which will upload a csv we need to get
access to our data my data is called
attrition underscore data i'll have the
link to the data and the resources tab
make sure you click there sign up for
your email you'll get access to this
project all the code all the data as
well as 29 other data science projects
so i'm going to hit open one of the hard
things about google cool lab is it does
not keep your data like deep node does
so i like deep know a little bit better
that's what this is saying right here is
hey this is going to be deleted once you
like disconnect from this which is
basically when you close your browser
just hit ok and then that data will
appear on the left hand side that pip
install finally finished it should take
around 5 minutes we can move on to this
one right here which is basically going
to import uh this thing called the naval
collab which tells pi caret that we're
in collab and that it should be knowing
that we're in collab you'll see why here
in a second the next step we want to do
is just load in the data so we're using
pandas we're just going to use the read
csv and get that attrition data and name
it data set the next two steps would be
to split the data into testing and
training so we can use this right here
the sample the random stay in the
fraction so we're doing five percent for
testing that is a little low but that's
fine and basically we can run that and
just get the testing and training the uh
unseen is going to be the testing and
data is going to be the training and
then the thing i wanted to do is just
look at the training data and see how
many people stay with the company so 83
of the people stay with the company so
meaning if we created a model that just
said everyone's going to stay at the
company that's that's the model that's
everyone's going to stay at the company
we'd be 83 accurate because we'd guess
we'd get 83 of them right and we'd miss
these other ones but that's the number
we have to beat okay we have to be 83
otherwise we just say hey everyone's
gonna stay and we're 83 accurate and
that would be that so 83 is the number
to be the next code we write is
importing the classification module from
pi caret and setting it all up you see
the data is equal to the data the target
is the attribution right that's what we
looked up here that's yes or no if they
stayed
and we can go ahead and hit run and
you'll see that basically it does a
bunch of stuff right here it's going to
show you all this different type data
types these are the columns and how it's
reading in those datas we might want to
look at that very carefully for the
video sake we're not going to right now
we're going to go ahead and press enter
and that will actually like run
everything
get it all set up so that in the next
section right here we can run my
all-time favorite line of code probably
i love this from pi carat just compare
models and just hit enter and watch it's
going to go and do like a bajillion
different calculations it's gonna run
through all these different
classification models and algorithms and
decide which one's the best for us it's
gonna give us the accuracy the auc all
the accuracy metrics that we want all in
one place with one line of code now we
will have to like hypertune these if you
want these to be really really good and
really correct this is a great start to
give us an idea of what algorithm might
work best and how to go from there okay
check this out i just finished running
it maybe took two minutes one minute to
run and it gave us all these different
models the linear discriminant analysis
ridge classifier um navis uh quadrant i
don't even know all these gay neighbors
right that's the one i'm most familiar
with random forest at a boost gradient
boosting logistic regression is another
one and you can click this guy right
here and it'll turn it into this table
where you can sort things so you see
that the linear discriminant analysis
actually had the highest accuracy now we
have all these other
accuracies and metrics for
classification that we need to worry
about for the sake of today's video
we're just going to go off accuracy and
see that the lda had the highest
accuracy of 0.871 so that was basically
87 accurate our model to beat was 83 so
it does look like we have a model that
could potentially uh outperform just
saying that everyone stays at the
company not by much only that four
percent but that four percent might be
worth a lot if you can actually try to
save them and intervene and keep those
people at the company so we're going to
dive a little bit deeper into this
linear discriminant analysis right now
so i want to create this lda model on
its own i'm going to call it model i
just said create model lda then i'm also
going to plot and i need to fix this
right here the models feature importance
so i'm going to go ahead and click that
and that will give me like a little bar
chart of basically what features what
columns are the most important
in my prediction so you see that the
bigger the number here the more
important that variable is so years with
current manager if you're at 12 that is
a big indicator okay um if you look at
the over time you know like do they get
paid overtime
uh training times last year zero if
you're not getting training that's a big
indicator so these are some indicators
that might we might be able to intervene
with and try to like help people not
leave maybe we give them a new manager
or maybe we give them overtime or maybe
we give them training stuff like that we
can also go ahead and take a look at
what we call our confusion matrix our
confusion matrix is basically a way of
seeing what we predicted right and what
we predicted wrong so
331 of the times we predicted that it
was going to be a no that they would
stay at the company and it was true but
sometimes we predicted that they would
at the company and they actually left
that would happen 19 times we predicted
that they would leave 35 times and they
did leave 35 times then we predicted
they'd leave 34 times and they actually
stayed those 34 times so we'd have to
think through you know what are the pros
and cons of all of this if if you think
someone's gonna leave and you give them
some extra benefits and they end up
staying like that's that's good right if
they're gonna stay anyways is that
really a big problem i'm not entirely
sure so you have to talk and think
through like as an hr person as the
company does it make sense how much
money are we spending to try to keep
these people but this this decision or
yeah this confusion matrix can basically
help you decide you know what's the
worth and is is this type of thing worth
it the last thing i want to do is just
take the data we have the model we
created and run it on the unseen data
predict it so we're going to make some
unseen predictions and basically see how
accurate that was so we're going to look
at the attribution or sorry attrition
versus the label which comes from the
unseen prediction and see how accurate
we are on this unseen data and you can
see we're still at 87 88
so that means even on the unseen data
this this uh model worked well now we'd
have to be careful and go through and
actually look what's in that model
because we could have just predicted all
no's that could have definitely happened
and they all are on those so we want to
make sure that we're like we're sampling
in sample not a sample but that's too
much for today's discussion we're going
to be happy with what we've got we
basically created an hr model that would
be able to predict attrition or them
staying at the company we can give this
back to our boss and not get fired if
you guys like this video you might like
these videos make sure you get the data
and the code in the link in the
description down below make sure you hit
subscribe and that's it bye

Title: The Only Data Analyst Portfolio Project You Need

Description: In this video, I'll introduce you to the framework that will help you land your dream data science job. I'll show the process by going through how I'd land a data analyst job at Amazon, and use StrataScratch as a way to create cool, realistic projects. 

In this project, I used MySQL to answer who some of the most active customers on Amazon's platform are. 


üìà Check out StrataScratch: https://stratascratch.com/?via=avery


#SQL #datascienceproject #DataScience

Video Transcript:
so you just found this awesome data
analyst role at amazon and you're
interested in applying you'll want to
have a portfolio of projects that show
off your skills but you won't need
dozens of projects you'll just need one
to impress the hiring manager and show
them that you are capable of doing the
job and so in this video i'll do a
walkthrough of how to build a specific
project to land this specific job the
idea being that we choose a project that
lines up exactly with the job
description and the skills required that
are listed and even use data from the
company to make it more realistic and
more cool the goal is to actually help
them solve a business problem before we
even start working for the company
inside of this interview we're going to
give them some value and that way they
give us some value back by hiring us so
this particular project isn't the
project you need but the framework that
i'm using to build this project is a
framework you can definitely steal and
use to land awesome jobs this framework
is something i talk about on a much
deeper level inside of my projects
course called data science project
studio is the best way to build data
science projects and portfolios with the
least amount of effort in the least
amount of time if you're interested in
learning more there will be a link in
the description down below so the first
thing we need to do is really study the
job description so we know exactly what
they're trying to find and figure out
how we can replicate that in our project
so i have the job description over here
on the left hand side i have read
highlighted the things i found important
so we're trying to uncover valuable
insights solve complex problems
insightful analysis reporting critical
business problems notable trends
business performance key performance
drivers key inputs key outputs those
types of things are what we're trying to
do inside of this project let's dive a
little bit deeper into the basic
qualifications they want us to basically
show that we can solve complex problems
with large data sets to produce
actionable business insights and they
have a big emphasis on being proficient
in sql extracting manipulating data
using sql so that will be our weapon of
choice for this project so we can
demonstrate to the hiring manager yes we
are capable you want to hire us so now
that we know what we need to show off
let's talk about where to get realistic
data that we can kind of come up with
that business insight so usually i'd
recommend kaggle kaggle has thousands of
data sets and including a lot of amazon
data sets i'm sure but i want to
introduce you to another resource inside
of your data journey that will be useful
and that is strata scratch and strata
scratch is an online data interview prep
platform with hundreds of data science
questions that are taken from real
interviews from real companies including
amazon so we're gonna go ahead and go
there and look for what data sets and
what questions they have from interviews
that have to deal with amazon by the way
i'll have a link to strata scratch down
below in the comments so make sure you
check that out so we're gonna come here
and click on coding questions right here
and then we're going to filter by what
company we're interested in and you see
i've already done that and i have
amazon's this are all of the amazon
medium hard questions so you can also do
easy questions or hard questions i think
for this particular one i'm just going
to look at medium for the simplicity of
this video but you could look at any of
those then we're going to look on the
title on the right hand side and be
looking for a title that will match the
things that the job description had
mentioned so i think the one that i am
interested in and you can click on these
and learn more about them um i think the
one that i am most interested in is this
three purchases one which basically the
prompt is a list of ids of customers who
made at least three orders in both 2020
and 2021. i think this does check some
boxes of like valuable insights i don't
think this is necessarily an easy
problem so it's a complex problem
notable trend business performance stuff
like that so i think i think we check
our boxes right here there's also a lot
of other questions that we could do for
this video i'm just going to tackle one
but you can maybe put together two or
three of these different questions from
strata scratch and like come up with a
really cool like
series of of projects that answer these
types of questions but for this one
we're just going to focus on the the
customers the three customers one so
here's what i came up with i don't know
if it's the most elegant way but it
solved the problem so what i did was
create basically two different queries
one that got all all of the user ids who
have more than three orders in 2020 and
one from 2021 and i basically did an
inner join on them to find what what the
commonality user ids between them are so
that's what i've done here is i've just
found the count
when i'm grouping by the user ids with a
having the count being greater than or
equal to three
um i also had to change obviously the
the year the date to a year i did that
for 2020 in 2021 interjoined them and i
ended up with u203 and u205 and you see
that that is the the answer and the
expected output over here so i solved
that problem now you wouldn't just want
to answer this question and like paste
the code inside your github and have
that be everything that you do that is
not enough that's not going to impress
anyone you want to create some sort of a
story and why this is important how this
could impact their business do a little
write up explain like what you saw in
the job description explain like your
thought process you know what trials you
had to overcome like how did you go
through this code and stuff like that
you don't want to just like paste the
code into github it just is not
impressive so you need to create some
sort of data narrative or a data story
associated with this project that's
something we talk about in the course we
don't have time to talk about it today
because i am doing 30 data science
projects in 30 days today was day 16.
i'm so glad to have you on this journey
if you enjoyed this project you might
also enjoy this one that's about python
and this one that's about data
visualization i'll be back again
tomorrow with another project

Title: Coding a data science project using ONLY my phone

Description: In this video, I attempt to build an entire data science project with ONLY my iPhone. I analyze Pokemon data using K-means Clustering, and write EVERY line of code using only my thumbs. I utilize Deepnote as my browser based IDE, and write code as I go camping and visit the ball to buy my wife a new phone.

Link to code + data: https://deepnote.com/workspace/averydata-36f64445-580d-463f-96ef-7bb22d675e31/project/Untitled-project-f9cc3ef7-f28e-4a03-a8a0-ad5ec23732c9/%2Fnotebook.ipynb


ANOTHER PROJECT TOMORROW 

#DataScienceProject #Kaggle #Python

Video Transcript:
before we get into the video i just want
to say it's almost midnight we're going
to get this video out on time which is
awesome and this is one of the favorite
videos i've done in this series so far
so check it out data team what's up this
is avery smith i'm doing 30 day science
projects in 30 days and today i'm going
camping and i need to get a project done
so i'm going to be in the car on the way
down it's like an hour and a half two
hour drive i'm going to be programming
using deep note i got the shirt on and
everything so deep note makes it
possible to do this so let's see if it
goes i wanted to see if it was possible
to build an entire data science project
only using my phone because sometimes
you won't have access to your computer
or maybe you don't have a computer so
can you do everything you need for a
data science project on just your
smartphone so i have an iphone 10 it's
not anything new you know it is an
iphone so it is nice um but i use deep
note deep note is a basic browser that
you can type stuff in and it'll
interpret your python for you online
notebooks very collaborative very
awesome and so i didn't need to have a
computer because python was installed on
the cloud and basically i accessed deep
note from my browser which was able to
give me access to python on the go
inside of the car while we were camping
for this whole camping trip now i will
say i was planning on doing like a fpv
first person view of me actually doing
this project i have my gopro and
everything and a headband and a chest
band that was gonna actually show you me
coding it on the phone but when i got in
the car my gopro was dead so you got
screen recordings instead so i'll talk
over what i kind of do in the screen
recordings and give you an idea of what
i what was going through my mind and how
we did this project let me go show you
what the project's going to be on
pokemon i love pokemon kaggle has
something called the complete pokemon
dataset which i was able to download on
my phone and then upload that csv from
my phone to deep note and be able to
interact with it inside of deep note
using pandas next i investigated that
data frame i basically just took a
snippet of it and looked across all the
different columns there was how much
added points it has against like
opponents and weakness there was how
much the attack has how much hp each
animal has you know what type of pokemon
they are what their specialty is a bunch
of different columns that you can check
out in the kaggle link that i'll have in
the resources down below and keep in
mind i'm just on an iphone 10 so like
it's a very skinny screen and so it was
very hard to move inside of deep note
with my little finger to see all the
different columns but we got the job
done now with this data i did have a
plan that i kind of want to do some sort
of clustering because i think like
pokemon types are just like super cool
and it's fascinating to like read about
them and see the differences and see the
similarities and stuff like that so i
want to take all the numeric columns and
do some sort of a classification
algorithm so i imported scikit-learn and
looked through all the different columns
and basically chose what columns i felt
were the most important which ends up
being like the attack the defense the hp
the height the weight and some other
numerical columns that we were going to
use for this clustering algorithm i did
use deep node's built-in visualization
tool that basically allows you to choose
a scatter plot and decide what's your x
and y axes and also the color and create
this defense and attack chart but it was
really hard to see and to use on my
small iphone but here's what it looks
like on desktop and that's as far as i
got before we ran out of cell phone
coverage and i couldn't use deep note
anymore because i didn't have access to
data on my phone from there i enjoyed my
day enjoyed my brother-in-law's birthday
we rode razors atvs we played spike ball
made some juicy steaks and then i
realized this all right we just spent a
long day
riding razors and atvs and you can see
i got the deep note shirt a little dirty
a little muddy i was able to code a
little bit in the car we ran out of
service pretty quickly
i was able to import the csv
and start to like visualize it
but that's about it then we're out of
service unfortunately so try again some
tomorrow in the car as well but i might
finish it at home
on the way home from camping i did try
to code more although service was really
spotty we went a different way but i was
able to look up scikit-learn's
documentation for k-means if you didn't
know k-means is one of the best and
easiest ways to do clustering so i
looked that up and copy and pasted some
of the demo code into deep notes that
i'd be able to change it to fit my own
settings by the way i'm coding in the
car now on the way to the apple store to
buy haley a new iphone
i got a new phone got a phone by this
point i did have k-means running on my
phone i did need to clean up the data a
little bit and remove a couple of the
rows because there were some null values
but at this point i was able to get the
k-means clustering actually working with
four clusters now i didn't really know
if four clusters was the appropriate
amount i made a quick little scatter
plot to try to visualize what those
clusters would look like i didn't have
time to do pca or principal component
analysis and try to like mess with the
dimensions a little bit to make this
visualization a little bit more
interesting
but i wanted to check to see what the
proper amount of clusters might be so
wrote the snippet of code right here
that basically goes through a for loop
trying different amounts of clusters and
seeing what the accuracy is this is
called an elbow chart and you basically
want to pick a point where you're not
sacrificing a lot on the accuracy but
you have as few clusters as possible so
i ended up with four i think you could
argue between four and six or even maybe
even seven but i chose four for
simplicity's sake the last thing i did
when i actually this one i got home i
got to my desk but no i didn't use the
computer i stayed on my phone here's
video evidence but i created this
scatter plot matrix in plotly express
showing all the different attributes
against each other with the colors being
the different clusterings this just
allows you to like see different like
outliers and like try to understand the
clustering so like for instance
crititalk and barbotch are kind of these
outliers um it's a little bit hard to
zoom in on this it was like nearly
impossible on my phone so that's what
i'm showing you on on desktop but you
could really play around with this and
try to understand the clusterings and
see what colors are where and how they
might relate and stuff like that
unfortunately i didn't have a whole lot
of time to do this but i definitely
think it's something that you guys can
take you know start from this right here
and make my clustering better than it is
i pretty much did the bare bones i
didn't even do a very clean or good job
of doing it but definitely take my
starter template and do whatever you
want run with this project so overall is
it possible to do a data science project
on your phone yes is it very enjoyable
no the screen's not very big it's hard
to type with your thumbs my thumbs are
super fast so it makes the whole thing
really kind of a frustrating process but
deep note is a really good option if you
do want to use your phone you can do
everything within deep note you can even
publish this whole project inside of
deep note and have it be published on
their platform with a clickable url to
the project which is totally awesome in
my mind as always for this 30 days
science projects in 30 days series that
i'm doing i will give you access to the
code and the data in the description
down below just down go down there look
for something called resources and
you'll be able to start from where i
finished and hey if you're watching this
far in the video you might watch these
videos over here you might really like
them you know i also want to subscribe
to the channel it helps other people
find my channel and i really appreciate
it for all the hard work that i'm
putting in it's really late guys i need
to go to bed so i can wake up for my 6
am gym class so i'll see you tomorrow

Title: Automate LinkedIn Using Python ü§î

Description: Ever get tired of accepting LinkedIn connections? When you get hundreds a day, it can be time consuming to press accept and message each person individually. In this video, we will use Python to fast-forward the LinkedIn connection request, and first message send with the help of naas.ai

This is Day 14 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days! Please subscribe to watch the whole series.


üí™ Try this code out yourself using Naas for free: https://app.naas.ai/user-redirect/naas/downloader?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jupyter-naas/awesome-notebooks/master/LinkedIn/LinkedIn_Accept_invitation_received.ipynb

Also, LinkedIn if you're watching, this is for demonstration purposes only. 

Subscribe for a data cookie üç™

See you tomorrow PROJECT DOERS! 

#LinkedIn #datascienceproject #pythonprojects

Video Transcript:
i'm going to be honest building 30 data
science projects in 30 days has been
absolutely exhausting this is day 14 and
i'm spent it takes a lot of effort to
not only build these projects these
unique projects but also make the
youtube video and edit it and then post
it and have all the code and everything
available to you it's a lot of work and
so in this video i'm trying to do a
project that is cool but also takes me a
little bit less time and that's why i'm
using nos okay nostat ai is a really
cool tool that you can use to do awesome
data science projects without having to
do that much work because it all starts
from templates so in today's project
we'll be using nos to do something that
i do every day and that is accept
linkedin connections and send them
messages nos will help us automate that
process to bulk accept a bunch of
message and then bulk message a bunch of
people using the linkedin api but the
cool part is i won't even have to do
very much coding at all because nos
comes with an awesome template that
already does this for me let me show you
start by going to nos.ai and then
logging in or making an account it's
absolutely free and you get at least 100
credits automatically then this has this
whole template section which has so many
cool tools that you can take a look at
so for instance there's stuff in aws
there's stuff in csv they're stuffed
with dash with draftkings you can get
mlb money lines mba money lines use
excel type stuff get information from
github get information from gmail google
analytics google search hubspot
so much stuff here uh the one i'm in
particular in is linkedin i think
linkedin stuff is really interesting you
can do all sorts of cool things i was
trying to get this other one to work
earlier today i couldn't quite get it um
i think it's because i have a lot of
linkedin posts but you could actually
send let me see where that one is see
there's so much linkedin send weekly
post engagement metrics by email i'd
love to get that up and working i tried
this morning i couldn't quite get it to
work automatically so we're doing one
that is a little bit faster in linkedin
and that is to accept
uh all invitations and send first
message so all i need to do is click
open enos and that'll open up a
jupiter lab instance of that particular
code that's already written for me and
just needs my own like expertise my
personal touch which in this case is
some cookies from my linkedin that will
teach you how to get right here but i
can go ahead and add those in add the
message and then you'll see that this
will run every hour basically it'll
accept all the connections and then send
them that first message all
automatically and keep in mind here that
this gnaw scheduler is running this
every hour so theoretically this is
something that usually takes me i don't
know maybe 10 minutes it can save me 10
minutes every hour which is saving me a
lot of time so this is a really cool
tool let me show you so if i go to
linkedin and click my network right here
this will show me that i have 87
connections i typically get about 200 a
day this is about half of them for the
day
you can accept all 87 and usually have
to go through and click accept accept
accept accept accept
accept accept and you can see that it's
really boring and tedious if i'm gonna
send individual messages it takes me a
long time to get through all 87 and
there's been days when i've definitely
been over a thousand connections so this
can definitely take a lot of time so for
the first message after this i'm going
to say thank you
so much for the connection i am
currently
building
30 data science projects
in 30 days
so i'm a bit slow to respond feel free
to check out
the
series here
let's give them a link to my youtube
channel paste that in and end it this
will run it every hour on the hour i'm
pretty sure
also i don't know exactly what time zone
am i in i guess it doesn't matter if
it's just running every hour let's make
sure that this is going to connect to my
linkedin and show all the invitations
here there should be a data frame with
all the different invitations that i
currently have which once again is 87.
let's see okay this is 87 rows so it
looks like that is working correctly
we're going to go ahead and run this
which is going to be the df accept new
connections oh
it's going
you heard it too i don't know if you
heard that little linkedin
see
it's accepting all of these i'm pretty
sure let's keep watching
accepting yep hear these keep popping up
look at it go through it keeps accepting
all of these i know it says i haven't
connected but if i refresh this page
this number will no longer be 87. see
we're down to 43. look at it it just
keeps going and going look at all this
automation it's doing for me okay well
it looks like it got through all of them
yep and it did okay this would be to
send them the first message now so i'm
gonna run this okay so it looks like it
sent one to this guy let's see there you
go it sent the message
right there
check that out so how cool was that we
were able to automate 87 linkedin
connections deceptions as well as send
them those messages that basically say
hey sorry i look at your message in the
future i'm a little busy right now check
out this youtube series so that was
really cool and pretty easy to be honest
we just had to use like three different
line codes and the nos template was
already set up for us to accomplish this
awesome automation i do want to put a
little caveat here to make sure that you
read linkedin's term of service and make
sure you know what nos is doing with the
linkedin api linkedin typically doesn't
love automation i'm not exactly sure how
you know approved this is or not
approved we'll have to talk to nas a
little bit more to understand that but
there's so many cool things that you can
do with nos and in this case i'm going
to use this when i'm out of the office
to send an out of the office message
basically saying hey i can't accept you
i you know i can't send you a message
right now i'm just a little bit busy but
you know here's some resources that
could help you out that's how i plan on
using it when i'm in the office i really
do like to read every message that i get
and try to give them a unique response
or at least give them a response that
will help them answer their question as
always guys i want you to be able to
replicate these projects so i'll go
ahead and put a link to this nos
template where you could basically just
change three codes and rewrite this
whole entire project yourself it should
only take you about a half hour which is
really awesome and if you're interested
in linkedin data i think you might like
this video right here and also if you
want to learn a little bit more about me
watch this video right there i'm gonna
go to church real quick but you will see
another video from me tomorrow bye

Title: Fitness Dashboard in Power BI | Data Analyst Project

Description: On Day 13 of building 30 data projects in 30 days, I used Power BI to hook up to my fitness data in Strava to create an exercise dashboard that shows how much I've ran, biked, and hiked. 

This is a fun data analyst project you can put on your data portfolio that would help you get data jobs that require data visualization or Power BI



CLICK ON MY CHANNEL FOR 29 OTHER DATA PROJECTS

#PowerBI #DataAnalyst #datascienceproject

Video Transcript:
when i'm not stuck programming at my
desk i love to exercise outside i love
to run mountain bike hike ski walk you
name it that's one of the reasons when i
quit exxonmobil and i could move
anywhere in the world i chose this
specific part of utah where i'm still
very close to the mountains and ski
resorts but it doesn't cost me millions
of dollars and to record all these
outdoor activities i use an app called
strava which is a fitness tracker and
social media for outdoor exercising in
this video we'll use power bi to display
the strava data that lets me understand
my exercise routine and what my
activities have been over the last few
years in a new light and by the way my
name is avery smith i'm doing 30 data
science projects in 30 days and i will
give you my power bi file and my data so
you can recreate this project on your
own all you need to do is click the link
in the description down below a few of
you might already use travo if so that's
awesome i'll show you how to get your
data in the next section of the video
for those who don't use strava feel free
to use mine or you can start using
strava it's absolutely free you can
download it on your phone and go for a
run or a walk and record it and then
you'll be able to get that data into
power bi later start by going to
strava.com and clicking login from there
go to your profile picture up here go to
settings click on my account on the left
hand side scroll down to the bottom
where it says download or delete your cl
account and press get started from there
the number two point it'll say download
request and you'll be able to request
your archive right here you can see that
i've already done it this week so i
can't do it again but you should be able
to click this and within 24 hours they
should send you an email that email will
look like this and all you need to do is
click this button right here to get a
big zip of all the files that zip file
will have a ton of different csvs with
different information in it also include
a bunch of the gps files for each
activity that you do the one in
particular we're going to be looking at
is the activities data it'll look like
this it'll have the activity date the
name the type any description that i add
in the amount of time the moving time
the distance
max speed elevation gain and a couple
other fields as well open up a blank
power bi file click get the data right
here select csv right here hit connect
and choose your activities csv and hit
open it'll give you a little preview
press load this is what we want our end
result to look like we're basically
going to give it a title a date filter
going to give the number activities and
the total time and then an activity
breakdown as well as a scatter plot of
time versus the distance so this is what
we are aiming for let's go ahead and get
started start off by pressing this text
box right here and we're going to call
it avery's
strava dashboard we'll also give it
maybe a little bit bigger something like
a 36 bold it
and
reshape it so it fits all in one line
and center it next let's add that date
slicer since it's going to be really
important click on the slicer go to
activities and we're going to find the
activity date drag that in right here
and there we go we have an activity date
slicer right there that we can drag up
towards the top that will be a filter
for the entire page let's get the
activity count so i'm going to use that
as this guy right here which is called a
card we can just take the activity id
and do a count basically so there we go
it automatically did that the count of
the activity id that's going to be how
many exercises or activities i had i
just want to rename it for this visual
and i'm going to call it number of act
or exercises baby number of activities
sounds good activities resize this and
move it up to the top right up there
this will be a big kpi that's that's
important to look at something like that
looks great now i'm doing the exact same
thing i'm just going to copy and paste
this and put it next to it this is going
to be the number of like hours or
minutes that we particularly spent so if
you look at our data we'll see there is
a field here called elapsed time and
that is how many seconds you spent doing
that activity now seconds isn't like
something that i usually track my
workouts in so i'm going to do is click
this up here and we're going to actually
we're going to right click on it sorry
we're going to create a new column and
i'm going to call this time in minutes
okay so i'm just going to call it time
min
for minutes and i'm going to set it
equal to the time which is the elapsed
time
we're going to divide that by 60 and
that'll be the amount of time in minutes
that particular workout is so they see
this is 80 40. that makes a lot more
sense so go back over here instead of
number activities we're gonna go to new
column called time in minutes
drag that up there let's see
okay there we go there is time in
minutes now that is going to be in sum
so let's go ahead and look at the sum
there we go you see it's 33 000 minutes
spent now notice if i drag this over
here
these update as well right so this is
all dynamic based off of this date
filter right there next we can make that
uh scatter plot so for instance we bring
the scatter plot down here we know we're
looking at the time in minutes as one of
the axes maybe we'll have that be the x
axis and then we have the distance right
so we need to go find the distance
column let's see distance put that in
for the y there you go
we're not going to summarize these at
all let's make sure they're not
summarized there we are so you see those
the time and the distance right there
now we want to put the colors on there
whether that be by the activity type
which is basically if it's a run
or if it is a bike so put the legend
right there there we have all of our
different uh activities that we're doing
in particular move this up here and kind
of resize it to allow for that uh bar
chart to be on there also just double
check these tool tips to see what's on
there so we have the run the amount of
time and amount the distance wow i
didn't run very far this is kind of a
weird one but you might also want to add
the uh name or the description right i
can't remember exactly what it's called
let's go check
it's on the left hand side of the table
it is called the activity description so
let's just add the activity
description right here
into the tool tips so you can maybe
learn a little bit more insight let's
see this one doesn't have one like for
instance up here this was that one
doesn't have one either
let's see well none of these have any
there we go mark my words i am done
hiking tip in the dark by myself so
that's a timpanogus that's a hike nearby
you see i did 25 miles and it took 545
minutes if we look at this one right
here what is this one
i don't know what that one is either so
i should do a better job writing these
descriptions while i'm actually doing
the activities next we'll move on to
that bar chart we wanted to make so that
bar chart
is basically we're going to come up to
here and look for the clustered bar
chart
we'll just go ahead and drag the
activity type
to the y-axis and the activity
type to the x-axis as well you'll see
that the automatically created that plot
for me
we can do a few things to make this just
a little bit nicer go over here to the
format your visual we're going to turn
on the data labels so that way we see
the numbers right there
and we're going to go ahead and mess
with the bar colors just a little bit we
can make it a formula based off of the
count so that way this is a little bit
more blue maybe we turn off the legend
because i think it's kind of indicative
and uh maybe we just change the title as
well so we'll just say this uh
activity
break
down
there we go
and this is basically what we are trying
to build right i mean this and this are
pretty much the exact same so we'll go
ahead and just save this and you can
publish this to basically power bi and
depending on your your account but i
think this was a really easy dashboard
to see my activity and how it changes we
can use the filter at the top love that
so i could just look at like for
instance the last maybe year would be
right here ish
this is the last year i've done 72
workouts
i've done a lot of writing the last year
versus if we were to look earlier and
not include this year i've done a lot
more runs i've recently gotten a lot
more into biking there you have it how
to hook up your strava data and create a
dashboard in power bi if you enjoyed
this video please hit subscribe and the
like button helps other people find this
video and check out these two videos
over here i think you'll like them as
well bye

Title: I Built a Kaggle Data Science Project in 30 Minutes

Description: In Day 13 of the Data Science Project challenge, I built a data science project quickly, using only 32 minutes to choose a subject and have an interesting data visualization by the end.

I used Kaggle to find the data, and get an idea of what type of project I wanted. I then used Python to created an animated data visualization. 



SUBSCRIBE IF YOU WANT TO SEE 29 OTHER DATA SCIENCE PROJECTS

See you tomorrow!

#Kaggle #DataScienceProject #Python

Video Transcript:
building projects is the secret to
breaking into data science but many
complain they don't have time for it so
in this video i'm going to show you that
you do have time for it we are going to
build an entire data science project in
just 30 minutes starting now okay i have
no idea what i'm even going to do i just
know i'm going to start with kaggle okay
kaggle has clean data sets and ideas
already for me so i know it'll be fast
we'll go to competitions we'll just see
what's kind of going on hey guys so
unfortunately my camera stopped
recording around the 17 minute mark and
it was like a huge file it was like
three gigabytes and it did not record
the rest of the 12 minutes so i'm gonna
walk you through step by step what i did
and kind of a breakdown version so i
hope that's okay else is here let's see
what else is here just
scrolling kaggle competitions predict
future sales that could be interesting
mayo clinic big derby big data derby oh
we're doing this one horses all right
we're in gold competition is to analyze
racing horses drafting strategies and
path efficiency they'll develop a model
never used before coordinate data with
racing data you will help racing owners
veterinarians better understand how
equine performance and well fit together
with better data analysis equine
welfare could significantly improve
context injury wealth of data okay so we
have art heart rate ekg longitude
latitude all those good things total
power landing vibration
a model to interpret one aspect of this
new data you'll be the first access this
launch two days ago okay so it just
started all right let's go ahead and
look at the data looks like we have five
four csvs start table a race table
a tracking table and a combined of all
the three okay let's click on i'm gonna
understand
and agree
okay track id
race id race number program number track
us index
latitude longitude
distance id
course type track condition
okay so that's all about
the competitions right yeah
then here's the race table so that's
going to be the track id the race id the
race number the distance id the course
type track condition
run up distance track type purse nice
post time okay let's look at the start
table
track of the race race number program
number weight carried i guess that's the
jockey ways
jockey and odds okay interesting and
then here's the tracking table which is
gonna have the
oh wait and i'm also wasn't paying
attention here there's seven more
columns on this one
run up distance race type purse post
time jockey odds okay so this one has a
lot of the information of that
this is the uh
ten
7 7 so the complete
is the combined of all three
and what are we supposed to do
we have like if they won or not let's
turn all of these on
so we have the track id the track the
race the number the program the latitude
the longitude
the distance the track condition the
run-up condition the type the purse the
jockey the odds shoot we don't have any
of like
the actual
winning data okay so let's see what some
other people have done i think we're
three minutes into this so far
uh we're gonna sort by most votes just
get the best one
here's some eda that might be all we
have time for so let's see what they're
doing
drafting strategies path efficiency
okay they read that all in
tracking head
price number value counts
program number wow that is cool
so that's looking what is that even
looking at
longitude and latitude
oh you know it'd be cool actually
oh this is risky though i don't know
odds of winning
odds by day event and weight carried
jeez i'm not sure if that was very
useful or not
but i was curious here what are they
using to plot this longitude and
latitude on the tracking one so let's go
back to the data here
uh
tracking
does this have longitude and latitude
oh right here
latitude and longitude
race date race number program number
track us
id
is this for like a specific horse i'm
very confused there's a track id
aqua this is the day
the race number
the program number
okay but then this is the track us id
which i don't think i fully understand
what that is
what what how many okay 25 minutes left
ah
gosh
um
let's go back to the data
you guys spend a lot of time
understanding this data let's go down
here
the track us
id
okay i
i have a random idea which would be
interesting
i'm going to look at flourish which i've
used in another video
they have a really cool setting here
that does like actual race
um visualizations which could be
interesting
i don't know how it does it though so
we're gonna try just quickly and just
see if this makes sense i definitely
feel that time crunch coming that's for
sure uh let's type in race oh wait that
i saw it
right here
athletics cycling let's see what this
looks like just for fun
that could be interesting
that has nothing to do with latitude and
longitude though that just has to do
with
let's see joe
and
when they hit certain points
okay maybe that's not it
okay let's see
launchy latitude complete
so they wait what is post time let's see
post time odds
so you have odds off of the jockey and
weight carried
race number
distance id
course type
i don't see the heart rate data that i
had mentioned earlier
run up distance
race type right here
purse
time of the day began
didn't it say it was going to have
let's see
i don't know what drafting strategies is
path
efficiency
okay so the path efficiency could be
cool that's like the latitude and the
longitude data right
and i think that's what they really want
us to focus on it sounds like
so let's see we have
latitude and longitude here
of the horse in the race passing as an
integer
okay
and that's the latitude and longitude of
a horse
so it'd be cool to just like
see what that looks like for one horse
we're just gonna make it for one horse
for right now and we're gonna go from
there okay so what i'm going to do is
i'm going to let's enter this
competition
let's see how do i enter i'm ready guys
all right new notebook
um
come on notebook load i have 20 minutes
left
okay
um so let's see i think this is just
going to show me
what is available to me
just did a kaggle notebook here
um
okay come on kaggle notebook in the
meantime we gotta search we have no time
we're gonna search python
animated
visualization there's not a whole lot
with animation that you can do in python
it is very
uh time intensive to do all this
let's just see
this is going to use this function
okay let's see
interest drop
animated wait that didn't have a plot
though right
let's see right here okay
okay so we're in i think we're just
going to use the complete is my guess
right let's see df equals
pd.read
csv of
this data right here let's just make
sure that's what we want it to be
oh i'm missing everything here we go
csv
i have 20 minutes left oh i missed
something what did i miss
all right we're in we're in via df.head
to make sure gosh this is really slow
let's see i know what it does come on
okay we're going to be making sure we
study this
we're gonna be doing a scatter plot i
hope that's okay
so let's sing
absolute value
um
import animator animator of the fig
right here the subplot
get
me pi
oh wait we don't want that one
let's do on this one right animator is
to build me a bar chart okay
let's see there's an animator here
in other words
simply read the post yeah fdf
df i don't see any animated line plot
fig
x label y label
build me a bar plot
all right let's actually see
oh this is
so slow oh my gosh all right df had
okay they do have the latitude and
longitude is there a horse id here
so for example let's let's simplify this
data a lot more
we're going to call it df
of the uh hquu
and that looks like it's on uh new
year's okay so we're going to do is take
our data frame filter it where data
frame is equal to
the track
id
is equal to uh aqu
and let's throw an and statement in here
and the
ray state i'm assuming that is just a
string since we just uploaded it
is equal to the uh
2019
zero one zero one
i think if we run that you hit an error
we need to put
parentheses around this
let's see
okay
done okay so that's at least smaller now
now let's make sure we show the first
five rows of that
okay so we have the latitude longitude
the track
id
which i still don't really get the race
number and the program number
track condition runner up
purse
post time weight carried
odds so this is all
distance id
okay so actually let's bring this down
even a little bit more let's just have
it be
in the race number of nine
for example
race number
is equal to nine and how many rows is
that that is my question that is 2 000
rows
um
i don't see
it's all in the right state that's all
okay there is different program numbers
track us id
how many jockeys are there
all right let's do that there let's do
that the
i know nothing about horse racing so
we'll do the race number is equal to
nine
and the uh
program number
is equal to six just because i see that
right off the bat
oh i hit an air
forgot to open this parentheses
okay let's see what that looks like how
many rows that is
oh boy
that did not work
so the race number k what
i'm almost positive
i saw that in the results
nine and the program number
is equal to six
makes me wonder if that's a string
somehow
oh my gosh guys
we have 15 minutes i don't know if i'm
able to do this
oh
my gosh
what is this
program
number
in the xerath
oh look at that
it's like weird so we'd have to clean
that up
we're just gonna cheat six actually
we're just gonna copy it exactly
um
okay so
that should tell us we want to see how
many jockeys are here is there multiple
jockeys
i'm gonna see 297
rows
now the question is we're going to call
this df small
now the question is does df small
in the jockey
have multiple values dot value counts
let's see let's see let's see
load load load nope only one okay so i
guess when you have a program number
that's like that horse specific number
okay so if we look at df small that
should only be one horse
and basically
i think what we're really interested in
is the trackus id
trackus
oh index i guess is what it's called
and then the latitude
and the longitude we don't have any
results which seems weird
longitude all right
um and i s spelt something wrong
awesome
okay
um in the meantime we need to figure
this out
uh i'm gonna look at one more animated
uh scatter plot python let's just see if
that gives me something different
it does
suppose you have this then you can
change the settings just give me the
whole thing
let's see what do i have to do to call
this
see that looks cool
okay we're going to take this code right
here
does it does it start with data too or
no
how does it know animated scanner
um
[Music]
animate scatter which is called
points self
do let's see let's see yeah it does have
random okay so i'm just gonna pull this
whole code in
right here
and see how well it works okay
so i misspelled something it must be oh
it's track with no c
gotcha okay so that's i think the data
we really want to pass in
gotta copy that in we have 13 minutes
guys i'm feeling a little bit nervous
okay paste that in
i don't see that moving at all
do y'all
all right
sometimes kaggle can be a little bit
weird
i guess we probably didn't call it huh
let's let's actually see what if we just
call it like this
i can't tell if that's moving or not
we're gonna see if it's a machine
problem or what
okay okay i'm busy
hit run
i do not see it moving
that looked so promising
so unfortunately that is where the
camera stopped recording i think the
file size just got too big and i was too
in the zone to notice that the camera
wasn't recording but i'll go ahead and
quickly summarize what i did with the
rest of the project and if i was able to
complete it in the 30 minutes or not i
was having a hard time with the
animation inside of kaggle i just it was
too many unknowns to know where i was
going to be saved and if the file size
was going to be too big for kaggle and
if capital could even handle this just
because it's on the cloud and you have
limited resources so i said you know
what i'm not going to worry about kaggle
and i just turned everything back into a
spider script so i could just work
locally on my machine i did end up
utilizing this script that i found on
stack overflow after looking at
matplotlib animated scatter i used this
basically this exact same thing but
instead of doing random points i ended
up using the ones from my data frame of
course and instead of saving it as an
mp4 i saved it as a gif it just seemed a
little bit easier and less memory my
goal was to be able to see one horse go
around the track so basically create an
animated data vis that showed a horse
going around the track and you can see i
didn't quite get it i came close i was
trying to get that horse to move and you
can see it's moving but it's like moving
backwards sometimes and so as time
expired i only had this which was not
very impressive if you ask me but about
one minute after the time expired i
figured it out i realized i was making a
mistake in my code specifically in the
for loop and i needed to reset the mask
data frames index and once i did that i
was able to get the horse to go around
the whole entire square which was really
exciting and really fun so we didn't do
it in 30 minutes we did it in 32 minutes
but that's still pretty close and then i
went about 15 minutes overtime to
actually make it so you could see all of
the horses moving along which was really
exciting because then it was like a race
you were watching these dots which are
basically horses race across the horse
track and that was almost like being
there in real life not really but it was
pretty fun the one problem was it was
hard to see who was in the lead because
i could i didn't really focus on the
colors and so what i did is i added
basically something right here that
would basically track what number was
where and so we saw that number three
won this particular race so congrats to
number three and i felt like this was a
good place to end the project so we
ended up at 45 minutes which is not 30
minutes but it's also not an hour did
not take us days to do this it only took
us about 45 minutes from complete
scratch to do this project and yes i
realized this project isn't a million
percent complete you could do a million
different things with it but sometimes
you just need to say hey at least i did
something and posted to your portfolio
and have a cool story and say i did this
in 45 minutes i was really proud of
myself but here are ways that you could
actually make this better you could be
able to put this into a streamlit app
that basically let them choose the track
the date the race number and then you
know visualize the race i think that
would be pretty cool so it's not just
this specific race which was like the
australian track and race nine or
something like that let the users choose
what they want to see right also you can
make those colors less psychedelic
actually make them correspond to a horse
maybe use different horse pictures that
could be fun like little horse emojis or
something like that yeah make the
visualization just like a little bit
cleaner at the title clean up the axes i
didn't have time to do that but you can
make that look a lot more neat there's
definitely ways that you can take this
project and make it something that
really looks good on your portfolio and
you can do that right now because i'm
going to give you the code and i'm going
to give you the data so down below in
the description there is a link that you
can click that says resources and
that'll take you to the place where you
can download the code and the data for
this particular project so go ahead
steal my code i'm giving it to you it's
not stealing i'm giving it to you right
now use that as a starter if you end up
using it you can feel free to attribute
me that's a hard word for me to say
attribute me and just say that you start
with it but you can do so many cooler
things than i have done with this code
and you can enter into that kaggle
contest as well there is like a pot of
like 25 grand or something like that
that you could possibly win by doing a
project like that by the way if you
didn't know my name is avery smith i'm
doing 30 data science projects in 30
days you can check out these projects
right here if you like this project and
i'll see you guys tomorrow

Title: Analyzing Google Analytics Data with Keboola

Description: 
üí•Try @keboola664 for free: https://www.keboola.com?utm_source=avery&utm_medium=youtube

üí° Learn Keboola for free with their academy: https://academy.keboola.com


SUBSCRIBE SO YOU SEE THE 29 OTHER PROJECTS! 

New project tomorrow.....üëÄ

#GoogleAnalytics #dataengineering #DataScience

Video Transcript:
with much of the world's business being
conducted online web data analysis is
becoming more and more important knowing
how people are accessing your web pages
how many people are coming through what
pages they're going to and what they're
doing on those web pages are so
important and they're key to almost
every business including mine that's why
in this video we'll be analyzing web
data from google analytics with the help
of kibula who's actually the sponsor of
today's video so thank you so much
kabula so here's the problem the default
way to capture web data is through
google analytics and honestly they have
a great platform but it's super
unintuitive it's not user friendly and
honestly i just think it's really hard
to get used to so instead we're going to
be using kebula to actually hook up and
sync with google analytics bring that
into the kibula environment use python
to do some transformations and create
some new data and then send that out to
some sort of visualization tool in this
case google data studio to make a
dashboard and this will all be
orchestrated in kibula by the way if
you're new here my name is avery and i
am doing 30 data science projects in 30
days and i'm open sourcing all the code
and all of the data so down below i've
put a link in the description that will
take you to the resources page where you
can basically see the data and the code
that i used for this particular project
and all 29 other projects the goal for
this project will be to take the google
analytics data get it into k boolea and
then do some machine learning time
forecasting on the google analytics data
store that as well and pair the original
data plus the forecasts into one google
data studio dashboard so let's get
started the first step is to go to
kebula.com that's k e b o o l a dot com
you can go ahead and click try kebula
today click on that and you'll see that
you get 300 free compute minutes every
month with snowflake you get 200 plus
data connectors all this good stuff
without a credit card on file which is
awesome which means you can get started
with no issues next you'll start to use
these things called flows so you can
click press new flow and give it a name
i'm going to call this the google
analytics
data grab and transform maybe kind of a
lengthy name but that's fine and i'm
going to go ahead and create flow and
what that does is it allows you to kind
of in this drag and drop instance right
here be able to create data flows so if
i click the plus right here i'll be able
to see a lot of the integrations that
are built into k boolea right out of the
gate so you see that google analytics is
right here they not only have that they
have instagram data they have google
drive they have google sheets mysql
snowflake aws s3
basically your standard data sources are
all going to be here and available for
you to bring this data inside of kbula
so i'll go ahead and select google
analytics because that's what i'm used
to authenticate with google select the
website that you're particularly
interested in save the profile and then
select what type of field that you want
in this case i'm interested in the
behavior data so i'm going to go to the
behavior site content all pages after
that you're ready to go you can click
run component and after that component
is run you can go to the load data and
you can see yep here's my data inside of
kbula you can even click data sample and
that'll show you an example of what the
data looks like now that the data is
inside of cable i can actually go ahead
and press the plus right here on the
flow sheet that allows me to do
something next with it and what i want
to do is i want to do a transformation
so i'm a python guy i like python so i'm
going to use the python as a
transformation you can also use r or
snowflake sql to do any of these
transformations so go ahead and click
python and we're going to create a new
name for this page predictions hit
create now we'll go ahead and configure
it for this transformation we have three
main parts we have the input which is
going to be the data that's coming in
that is going to be the behavioral
analysis basically the page visits that
we already have stored in cable you'll
see that here that's going to dump as a
csv with this name right here we have
what we're going to create out of it so
i'm going to create something from the
output csv that i make in python and
store that as a table here and the last
thing of course is the script section
where you have the different libraries
that you're using in python and then
these blocks these blocks are where you
actually have the script written that
actually does the code so here's the
code that i ended up writing it looks
like it's 30 lines that basically does a
prediction on the behavior for my
specific data of choice which is how
many people visit the 21 days to data
website now one cool thing about kbulla
is it actually gives you access to what
i call a workspace or a sandbox
basically it's just a spun up if you're
using python a spun up jupiter lab that
allows you to connect to your data
inside of the cloud so you can basically
experiment with your data try things out
and that's what i use to create this
script right here which basically just
takes the 21 days to data data and does
a quick arima model to predict you know
what the web traffic might be on the
next given day something like that so i
practice writing that inside of the
sandbox or what they call a workspace
once you feel like that code is ready
you can go ahead and press the x scroll
up to the top and hit run transformation
so it actually runs now you'll see that
i did get some errors it actually took
me quite a while to get this one working
what's really cool is they have this
chat right here where they can basically
allow you to talk to an engineer nearly
at any time and they'll be able to help
you solve your problems next we're going
to take the outcome of what we did here
with the predictions which is basically
we created a new table that has all the
predictions stored and we're going to
send those to bigquery sending those to
bigquery allows us to access those in
google data studio so i can just search
data destination and that'll show a big
query right here and we can go ahead and
enable this configuration for
configuration all i needed to upload was
the config.json that basically has my
api key for the bigquery and also tell
what data set i wanted and then it
automatically popped up in my bigquery i
did that not only for my data set that i
created which is the prediction data set
but also the original google analytics
data set i push into bigquery as a table
as well so i'd have access to both if
you've never heard of google data studio
before it's basically just like tableau
or power bi it's some sort of bi tool
it's a data visualization dashboard
creation tool that is created by google
and basically it's free
it's browser-based so i like those two
aspects of it you never have to download
anything you never have to pay any money
but it is lacking a lot of features and
it isn't really intuitive and super easy
to use but i like it for some use cases
i definitely think it can be useful and
i have had confirmation that people at
google are actually using this google
data studio so i think it'll get better
over time as it is still a pretty new
software getting the data from bigquery
to google data studio is as easy as
pressing a few buttons press the add
data and then go ahead and click on
bigquery which is by the way is a big is
a google product i click the project
which is i've creatively named my first
project twice i guess and here's my
predictions table and then here is the
original table of the google analytics
data to add a chart you just press add a
chart and you select which one you want
in this case i want to make a scatter
plot just go ahead and plop that onto
the screen and choose your x and y
variable i'm going to do one with let's
see page views and we'll do one maybe
with the average time on page let's see
what that looks like
we can create this scatter plot right
here so uh you can make it bigger you
can drag it you can add all sorts of
different text so for instance here's a
text i can call this 21 days maybe web
analysis
you can add pictures if you want you can
add uh
urls like embed stuff you can add
different shapes different
community graphs there's so much stuff
for you for you to add inside of google
data studio after playing around for a
few minutes i made this pretty simple
dashboard that's going to be the end of
this project i think it's really cool
and basically what it shows is the exit
rate against the bounce rate against the
average time on page so like this is
actually pretty interesting one like
this i would want to know what happened
on this day to try to like figure out
how could i could recreate that or why
that was happening i also have this line
chart down here which basically shows my
page views my daily page views against
the predicted page views so you can see
my model was not that great
i would take some time and actually try
to train that model a little bit better
and also make it predict a little bit
better in the future so that's how this
project could be improved now also i
didn't have to use google data studio we
didn't have to take our tables and put
them into bigquery actually using kebula
what you can do is just put them
directly into tableau or power bi which
i think are great options but i already
have a tableau video and i'm already
planning a power bi video so i wanted to
take this opportunity to show you how
flexible caboola is and also give you an
introduction to google data studio now
i'm going to challenge you and your team
to try creating a project using kbula
it's a really cool one-stop shop that
basically is all your modern data stack
needs so if your data scientist or data
engineer it just makes your job easier
because instead of using dbt
and airflow and 5 tran and high touch it
just combines all of that into one
simple place and you're not even coding
that much which is awesome you just get
to use the interface so it makes your
job way easier once again you have 300
free minutes so why not test it out and
see what it's like it comes with 200
pre-built components things like google
drive google sheets of course google
analytics which we did today it can
connect to mysql snowflake s3 bigquery
sql sql sql tableau facebook ads shopify
stuff honestly if someone wants to hook
up my instagram business data with my
google analytics data we could like
figure out like how many people are
going to my website from instagram and
my instagram ads and stuff like that i'd
honestly probably pay for it so if
you're a freelancer or something like
that this could be like a really cool
product for you to have that basically
combines different data sets puts them
together and does great analysis with it
i know i'd pay for that and so i'm sure
there's other people that would pay for
that as well thanks again to kibula for
sponsoring this video this is day 12 of
building 30 days science projects in 30
days we're almost halfway done you can
check out the other videos right here
and right here and i'll see you guys
tomorrow bye

Title: Analysis of AirBnB Data Using SQL | Data Portfolio Project

Description: Practice your SQL skills by analyzing AirBnB data from the Austin Texas area. This would also make a great data portfolio project to add to your data portfolio or resume. I'll walk you through where to get the data, and how to answer business problems using SQL like what hosts are making the most money.

This video is part of a challenge I'm doing to do 30 Data Science Projects in 30 days 
üëâ Watch the other videos https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLo0oTKi2fPNiMBo2hXreEetXCXev170ZZ


See you data nerds tomorrow! 

#SQL #dataanalyst #datascienceproject

Video Transcript:
i love to travel and nearly everywhere i
go i end up using an airbnb and so in
today's video we are going to do some
data analysis on airbnb data using sql
i'll walk you through where i got the
data set how i got into my sequel and
what business problems i tried to solve
and actually going through solving them
using sql so originally for this project
i was hoping to get airbnb data from
utah because i live in utah and i was
really actually am curious about what
it's like to own an airbnb i've been
thinking about investing in one but
unfortunately it's so hard to actually
get airbnb data airbnb does a great job
with their security team making sure
it's very difficult to web scrape their
site one of the things they do is make
sure that your account requires a phone
number so i don't have multiple phone
numbers so i can't create a burner
account and so it's just harder to
actually use and since i'm building 30
days science projects in 30 days i don't
really have the time to actually write a
really good web scraper to go through
airbnb so i was stuck with finding a
different data solution and i found
inside airbnb now inside airbnb has a
couple different data sets that they
periodically post from different cities
so i selected one of my favorite cities
to visit in the world austin texas to do
this analysis on by the way if you
haven't been to austin texas i highly
recommend it i was just there in may
with a bunch of other data content
creators and documented the trip in this
video right here you can check it out
after you watch this one okay so you
want to make sure that you download the
compressed csvs to your local machine
and i use some sort of unzipping tool to
unzip them to regular csvs but i want to
do this project in sql so i still have
to figure out how to get the csvs from a
csv inside of sql so i wrote this python
code that did that all for me basically
just goes through each one of the csvs
uploads it into a pandas data frame and
sends that pandas data frame to my
sequel using sql alchemy by the way i'll
have all the data and all the codes so
the csvs as well as this python script
as well as the sql queries i'll be
writing available to you for free down
in the description there's a link that
will take you to the resources and you
can get them for free once i ran the
script and actually had the csvs inside
of my sql and created those data tables
i was ready to get going in this case i
put myself as the key business
stakeholder because i am interested in
becoming an investor and basically i
wanted to see how do airbnbs do in
austin texas i love austin i would
definitely consider having some sort of
airbnb there if it made sense
financially so i came up with two main
questions that i would like to have
answered one how much are the top airbnb
earners making in austin texas and two
which hosts that already operate and own
airbnbs could be potential customers for
an airbnb cleaning business idea that i
have so let's start with question one so
how much you make is going to be based
off of your nightly price multiplied by
how many nights you are booked the data
does give us a price column but we'll
have to go ahead and clean that up so
here we are in the my sequel workbench i
use select star from listings to go
ahead and get all of the columns in all
of the rows for this particular table
then we can scroll over it's kind of
hidden over here on the right hand side
but we can actually find the price
column right here but now we need to
clean that right because it is not a
number it has that dollar sign in front
of it which is actually making it a
string which is not good for
calculations and averages and sums and
stuff like that so let's go ahead and
get that cleaned up so there's a couple
different ways to do this but what i did
was i replaced the dollar sign in the
price column with nothing and i cast
that entire column is unsigned which
will basically turn it into an integer
there you go you see i have the price
which is 111 dollars just changed to 111
now it's not only just about your price
you also have to be booked out at that
price so there's no booked column but
there is this interesting availability
column so there is the amount of days
available in the next 30 days next 60
days 90 days and 365 days and so if we
subtract for instance 30 from the
availability 30 you would basically be
left with 24 right so 30 minus 6 is
equal to 24 and we can assume that's how
many nights it's actually booked out for
the next 30 days and so what we can do
is create this query right here which
gets the id the listing url and the name
of the listing as well as how many days
in the next 30 days is it booked out the
nightly price and then that was the
total projected revenue for the next
month which is basically just the how
many times are you booked out times the
nightly price and get this huge list of
the top 20 airbnb operators in the
austin texas area now i do want to pause
and just take a moment and say i
investigated these and it turns out a
lot of these you can't book for the next
year so either they're just uber popular
and they've already booked out an entire
year worth of listings or probably more
likely they don't have it up for booking
the next year so you'd want to like
tease that out somehow so maybe you'd go
into the bookings available in the next
365 days and if it is zero you would not
include in this analysis but i challenge
you to take some time and think through
how would you solve this business
problem next i was thinking well maybe i
don't actually want to start an airbnb
maybe i just want to start an airbnb
servicing company specifically in
cleaning the cleaning fees when you're
booking airbnbs are always so large and
it's actually the only human element
that is required for an airbnb business
and so i think there's a lot of
potential where you could use better
cleaning services to have a better
airbnb operating system i was wondering
if i could maybe create like an awesome
list of potential customers for my
airbnb cleaning business based off of
the idea of i'm going to find the hosts
who have the most complaints about their
listing being dirty and those people are
probably likely to be open to my pitch
of hey let's get you a new airbnb
cleaning service for this one i took the
reviews table and actually did an inner
join on the listings where the listing
id matched the listing id so basically
we have all the reviews we have the
additional listing information from the
listing table as well but we don't want
all reviews right we just want the ones
where the comments have the word dirty
somewhere in them and even then we don't
want the comments we actually want the
hosts we want the name of the hosts that
have the most reviews with the word
dirty in it so we use a simple group by
right here and we include the host id
the host url the host name and then that
count which will be the number of dirty
reviews and we get this awesome
potential customer list for instance
wander jaunt you have 133 reviews that
mention the word dirty would you like to
try avery's airbnb cleaning service for
a low discount price this week wandra
jaunt has no chance no chance so while i
make a couple calls to try to bring
avery's airbnb cleaning service off the
ground why don't you guys check out some
of these other projects that i've done
recently that i think you'll really
enjoy because it'll help you build out
your data science portfolio bye

Title: Sports Analytics Project With Python & Streamlit

Description: My brother Graham wants to work in analytics for the NBA team, the Utah Jazz. In this video, I‚Äôll walk you & him, through a sports analytics project that would love great on your data science portfolio & hopefully help Graham land a job in data.

We'll use Streamlit in Python to great a data web app that will allow all sports fans to play with NBA lineup data to try to think like a data scientist


üìà Watch 29 other tutorials on my channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

#SportsAnalytics #datascienceproject #python

Video Transcript:
my brother graham wants to work in the
nba doing analytics and so in this video
i'll walk him and you through the
process of creating a sports analytics
project specifically for the nba that'll
hopefully get him and you hired
[Music]
so i know a couple months ago you had
said that the utah jazz had opened up a
data internship right the good news is i
found another one graham and i spent the
next half hour diving really deep inside
of this job description for this job
opening for this mba data position and
we came up with the decision that we
needed to show that we had etl api
skills basically getting data from the
mba to our local machine we need to
demonstrate that we also need to
demonstrate some sql or python data
analysis capabilities and lastly we need
to demonstrate that we were able to
create some sort of a front end where a
coach or a player could actually be
using the application it was also very
evident that they wanted the topic to be
something on game preparation game
evaluation or player development we
decided to focus on the game evaluation
because we thought it would be the
easiest and also kind of the most
interesting we then tried to think
through what would be useful for the
jazz in terms of game evaluation what
would be something that they'd be
interested in and that could potentially
be useful to them and we ended up
landing on thinking about lineups we
ended up deciding we wanted to create
some sort of web app that lets you test
and play with different lineup
combinations and see how that might
affect the stats of the team we probably
spent the next hour exploring different
data sets trying things like kaggle
looking at different apis but we ended
up settling on the mba api after we
spent some time trying to understand it
we were able to get it to work finally
and give us data using the mba api we
were able to basically bring in all of
the team lineups from the 2021-2022
season so here's the function that does
that basically it just gives you a bunch
of data about the lineups including the
minutes they played their plus minus
score other stuff like that
and of course who those five players are
in that particular lineup we created a
function that would get it for the
2021-2022 regular season and then we
basically looped through all the
different teams or i guess really all
the team ids which we got here and
created a giant csv called nba lineup
2021 that basically had every possible
lineup for every single team during the
2021-2282 season that csv ended up being
7500 rows so that is the total number of
combinations of nba players that
happened in this last season we saved
that data as a csv and we knew we needed
to create some sort of a front end that
would allow coaches and players to mess
around with this data and create some
cool visualizations and filters so they
could do their own analysis when it
comes to making these types of web
applications very quickly and with my
limited programming knowledge i really
enjoy streamline i think streamlight is
one of the easiest ways to deploy some
sort of data web tool that would allow
other people to access it almost
immediately here's what we created we
call it the mba lineup analysis tool so
first you choose your team it has all 30
teams right here we're big utah jazz
fans so we're going to select the utah
jazz then it automatically populates a
starting five it's not necessarily the
starting five it's a starting five and
shows you what the minutes the plus
minus the field goal percentage and the
field goal percentage from three point
land as well and then it breaks all that
down by these histograms down below so
the blue represents all of the different
lineups and the red vertical line is
this particular light so this particular
lineup was the outlier by far it's our
starting lineup and you can see that we
played over 600 minutes with these guys
the plus minus for these was huge it was
actually 93 which seems to be almost the
largest that the jazz had and the field
goal percentage was around that point
five as well as the three-point
percentage maybe was about the average
around .39 now let's say someone got
hurt so for example maybe rudy gobert
could not play that knight or we're
going to make a substitution we can sub
out rudy and put in someone like
whiteside hassan whiteside and hit enter
and we can see wow the plus minus drops
to 27 you know the minutes is 74 so on
and so forth basically this is a
hands-on tool for coaches and players to
see how different combinations of
players affect the game all right graham
so if i were to continue this if i was
you and we're going to continue this and
make it better which i definitely think
we can make better here's a couple
things that i would do so first off i'd
go to github and you're already a
collaborator here but the people
watching this video will not be so
they'll go to code and they'll basically
fork it one way or another whether
that's you know via the zip or github
desktop that way they have access to
their own code and some things that you
or someone else could add the first
thing that i think needs to be addressed
is if you go down to four players it'll
throw an error right
so i think what we want to do is
basically put
an if statement so we're only going to
um show
this stuff
if
the number of players is equal to five
the next thing i'd probably add is i'd
add a secondary horizontal line
that is maybe dashed and in black
that would show the mean so to do that
you would basically just add
uh these let's see these extra v lines
but instead of in df important min it
would be dfm df
team
min dot mean basically another thing is
that we only really looked at like the
select your player it would be cool
to like for instance
this this would be more work to either
add a whole new section on like the just
exploring the team data in general right
because like there's no way for us to
look at the data
for for just the team as a whole it has
to be five players you have you have no
choice right it'd be fun to have either
like another page or somewhere on this
page where you could add someone else
that would be able to
um that would explore the whole team as
a whole but maybe the most important
thing would be a call to action to
people who are looking here so you could
you could have potential readers that
want to add to this or change it and so
you could say you know you can fork the
repo at this link but more specifically
recruiters the jazz you want to say
reach out to me contact me at this email
or this link so if you want to make any
of these changes i will give you the
code and all the data for absolutely
free just go ahead and click the link
down below in the description that says
resources sign up and you'll be able to
have the resources at your pleasure by
the way my name is avery smith i'm doing
30 data science projects in 30 days if
you enjoyed this video i think you'll
enjoy this video as well please check it
out bye

Title: Using R to Analyze if Survivor is Racist (Unique Data Science Project)

Description: Survivor is one of my favorite shows, but is it racist? In this video, we will use the statistical language R to try to prove with data whether it is or not. We'll load in the data, clean the data, and create a few data visualizations with it.

You can take this project and turn it into a very nice data analytics project that would like great on your data science portfolio. 

This is Day 8 of 30 Data Science Projects in 30 Days. If you're new here, please hit subscribe to make sure sure you catch the remaining 22 videos! üëâ https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA


I'll be posting another project tomorrow so be sure to subscribe to get notified! 

#rstats #survivor #datascienceproject

Video Transcript:
in this video we'll use statistics and
data visualization in r to create a data
science project to evaluate whether the
television show's survivor is racist or
not let's get into it in season 42 of
survivor there was a critical
conversation surrounding race and its
influence in the game just as the game
had gotten to the top 10 or the jury
stage chanel howard was voted out
followed by roxroy bailey both of whom
are black and consequently in the next
tribal council
fellow black contestants marianne oktech
andrea wheeler seem to be in the
chopping block meaning that the first
three people voted out of tribal council
would all be black to which marianne
andrea responded with this chanel goes
out okay that's fine that's one thing
rockstar goes out that's another person
i write drea's name out that's three
black people in a row like the same
thing over and over again and again and
again
and they continue to basically say that
in survivor history people of color are
typically voted out quicker than
non-people of color and that's a fair
claim i have no idea but i want to try
to take this in and analyze it with the
power of data and luckily we can do that
due to an awesome r package called
survivor emphasis on the r it's a
package that is maintained by daniel oem
and it's incredible this package
basically has all the history of
survivor in as many ways as you could
possibly imagine as contestant
demographics it has challenges it has
advantages secret idols it has the
season watchings the ratings how many
people are watching the voting history
has so much survivor data all that you
could ever need really so we're going to
use that data and the statistical
programming language are to try to
answer is survivor racist
do people of color actually get voted
out quicker on average than people of
non-color so i'm about to break that
down and give you an answer but just so
you know all of the data all of my files
they're all available for free to you
with a link in the description down
below they'll give you access to the r
package the data and the code so make
sure you go down there click the link
and while you're down there why not hit
the like and the subscribe button that
helps other people like you find my
videos and i'm very grateful for that so
i started off with a blank r markdown
file in rstudio and then i made sure
that the survivor package was already
installed as well as import that as well
as the dipler and the ggplot2 libraries
which are used for data management and
graphing respectively next i had to
combine the castaways and the castaway
details table from the package to have
the contestants demographic fields tied
to their result fields i also did some
dramatic simplification in the race
fields that you know may or may not be
exactly right and that's part of the
problem i i will fully admit that this
analysis isn't 100 complete or thorough
and basically what i did was i just
narrowed it down to four fields white
black asian and basically other it's
basically a combination of hispanic
latino native american also these
demographics i'm pretty sure were done
by hand by the package maintainers they
also could be potentially wrong i then
grouped by the season and by this
cleaned up race and basically counted
and figured out the frequency
and was able to create this pretty cool
area chart basically what this chart
shows is the x-axis is the season
starting with season one and going to
season 42 and the y-axis is freak which
stands for frequency and that's
basically the percentage of that race in
that season so for instance in the
beginning in season one i believe that
it was about 82 percent white and i
guess the remaining 18 percent was black
and those were the only two races then
we have asian races coming in and
hispanic races so on and so forth note
that it's actually important to compare
this graph to what the actual race
breakdown in the united states are
because there is more white contestants
but there is also more white people and
so we need to keep these proportion
differences in mind so there's on
average about 60
of of americans are white and so that
should be the represented number in
survivor and you can see that we're now
at 50 which is actually below the
average i encourage you to pause this
and study this graph and compare these
two proportions but basically what i
take away is survivor hasn't always been
race proportional with quite a bit of
the early days having an over
representation of whites there was a lot
of under representation of hispanics and
latinos except for those two seasons not
exactly sure what happened there and
also asians and blacks have been
underrated and they have been
overrepresented as well now this graph
does talk about race but it doesn't
address what drea and marianne were
actually talking about they were
claiming that people of color actually
voted earlier out on survivor than
non-people of color so to try to address
this basically what i did was figure out
how many contestants are in each season
because it changes from season to season
and i took the order they were voted out
in and i divided it by the count the
number of people in that season what
that gave me is what i call place and
basically what place is is a
representation of where you finished
meaning if you won you have a place of
one if you were last you'd be place of
zero and if you were in the middle you'd
have a score of 0.5 then made a strip
plot with violin plots also to show the
distribution of place based upon race
now obviously there is a lot of purple
dots which represents white right but if
you're looking for uneven patterns in
the data somewhere i'm not exactly sure
that i see it with my naked eye now you
might be able to claim there is quite a
bit of purple up here towards the top
and you might be able to say wow that is
a lot of hype white finishers right but
it's really hard to actually make out
that pattern in my opinion now i do want
to pause really quickly and just say
that i know race is a serious subject
and i also know that it's not something
that we should take lightly my entire
analysis was done in about three hours
and i would love to spend more time on
this and i encourage you guys to spend a
lot more time on this unfortunately i'm
doing 30-day science projects in 30 days
and this is the only time i had allotted
for this project today so i know this is
incomplete but please get the data get
the r file and do better than me so is
survivor racist maybe but i don't
believe that black contestants are
necessarily for sure voted out faster
than non-black contestants but i can't
say for certain it's just my thought i'd
love to hear your thoughts by the way if
you enjoyed this video you're really
going to enjoy this video i did
yesterday about how to create ai
generated art in less than five minutes
with no coding enjoy i'll be back
tomorrow with a new project

Title: How to Create AI Generated Art With Midjourney

Description: In this video, I‚Äôll walk you through how to get create amazing A.I. generated art and make beautiful digital paintings quickly using the AI tool Midjourney. 

You'll be able to do this tutorial in less than 10 minutes, and have some cool artificial intelligence art by the end of it. Any data professional would be impressed with this on a portfolio, if you went into explaining how the algorithm works, and maybe use something like GPT3 to generate the prompts. 

This is Day 7 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. I‚Äôve already done projects on animal shelters, the most famous man in the world. iPhone apps, and NFT‚Äôs.

Want to catch the whole series? Subscribe here üëá
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA



I‚Äôll be back tomorrow with another project :) 

#aiart #DataVisualization #DataScienceProject

Video Transcript:
art is one of my favorite things but
guess what none of these images you're
seeing on the screen were created by a
human they are all created by ai or
artificial intelligence and by the end
of this video you'll be able to create
hundreds of pieces just like these so
make sure you watch to the end so you
can do that yourself you might be
thinking well i don't know anything
about artificial intelligence or coding
so i won't be able to do this but i
promise you if you can just write a
simple sentence you'll be able to create
these pieces and they'll be beautiful
and it's all thanks to this tool mid
journey mid journey is an independent
research lab exploring new mediums of
thought and their ai software allows you
to type a simple sentence to a discord
bot and seconds later you'll have four
ai generated images about that prompt
it's so freaking cool let's go ahead and
try it out start by going to
midjourney.com
then go ahead and press join the beta
this one's a discord and you just need
to hit continue or accept inside the
discord you'll get a getting started
message and basically all you need to do
is go to one of the newbie channels
which has been the left-hand side type
backslash imagine and then whatever you
want the bot will then send you four
images in 60 seconds click numbered
buttons underneath to get upscales or
variations this beta free trial will
give you around 25 free queries and then
you'll be able to buy a different
membership with different pricing tiers
okay so i'm gonna go ahead and press
slash imagine and what do i want to
imagine well maybe i'll say a young man
on a computer
at a desk
looking happy
hit enter let's see if this runs okay so
it says waiting to start right here so
we're gonna watch that here for a second
and see what happens to it okay you'll
see that it's three percent done it has
these four images right here
can't really tell what's happening quite
yet
okay there we go we got a young man on
the computer now we see some faces looks
like maybe a computer here
lots of dark hair is what i'm noticing
okay we're moving up in the world we
have a computer looks like maybe two
computers here maybe an afro on this one
that's pretty cool
okay we're getting a little bit more
developed a little bit more developed
and uh this one's kind of abstract down
here at the bottom i didn't really give
it an arch
description but i think these are kind
of cool
check these out we got some some of the
hair is all kind of similar i guess wow
this one's turning out really nice in
the bottom left that one looks pretty
realistic actually okay and there you go
it is done so i have a couple different
uh options here
all of it's really cool i actually
really like all of it so if i had to
choose one that was my favorite
i don't know maybe this one
this one's kind of weird so if i wanted
to get a bigger version of that what i
could do is go back to the discord right
here click off this and i could say
upscale 1 and that would then create a
larger version of upscale one i'm going
to make sure that i click on this open
the original and go ahead and save it
image as i'll say this young
man at computer so here's our finished
product and it's kind of interesting i
didn't really give it any specific
painting or art style i just gave it a
prompt and it created this super cool i
want to show you just a couple other
prompts and images just so you can get a
feel for it so someone said cyberpunk
freddy
krueger and this is what they got those
are pretty cool okay we got a camel
hybrid with elephant ultra detail
those are pretty scary looking to be
honest wow energy drink can rocks in
dark jungle with neon lights
photorealistic atmospheric wow maybe
we're doing some ad campaigns here
charizard pokemon game of thrones dragon
cinematic realistic
wow that is cool cute smiling 3d
rendered cheap that is a little scary
beautiful man with snake eyes at night
that's pretty cool castle kingdom of
inferno bright moon these are awesome
beaver holding a chainsaw realistic that
is impressive so hopefully now you see
how powerful this potentially could be
and where i see this being used is i'm
sure there's people making nft projects
with this generated art artists are
getting into this generated art i think
it could be huge for branding we saw
that like can inside of like the the
river on the rocks and stuff like that
maybe some marketing i saw people doing
album covers potentially using this tool
so i think anytime you've used some sort
of art cover photos you know podcast
episode those types of things you could
potentially be using this tool if you're
into cool applications of artificial
intelligence and machine learning just
like this you might also be interested
in these videos i'm doing 30 data
science projects in 30 days we've done
cool things like analyze nfts look at a
word cloud of an episode of the office
and a lot of cool things so definitely
check it out alright see you tomorrow

Title: Make Word Cloud For FREE (Easy Data Analyst Project)

Description: How to build a word cloud with an image, QUICKLY! In this video, I‚Äôll walk you through how to make a word cloud with your choice of text (I choose The Office), and create a word cloud on an image.  This data project should take you less than 15 minutes and would look very cool on your data analytics portfolio page! 


This is Day 6 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. 

üìä Want 29 other data science project tutorials? Subscribe here üëá
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

I‚Äôll be back tomorrow with another project :)

SUBSCRIBE SO YOU DON'T MISS IT

#DataAnalyst #DataVisualization #DataAnalyticsProject #WordCloud

Video Transcript:
in the next five minutes i'm going to
show you how to easily make a word cloud
with an image in this case i'm going to
use a script from the television show
the office and going to use an image
from the office as well but you can
easily replace the text with whatever
text or image you want now the first
step to making a word cloud is making
sure you actually understand what a word
cloud is a word cloud is a data driven
image that basically shows what words
are used the most within a text you
basically have a bunch of words inside
of an image and the bigger the text size
the more frequently that word is used in
the text typically they look something
like this where the size of the word
corresponds to how frequently used it's
used in the text now this one's kind of
just boring with a black background and
kind of random colors but what's cooler
is if you actually have an image that
the word cloud is forming to that covers
the shape and the color that corresponds
a little bit more to the topic of the
text it just makes it a little more fun
and a little bit more topic based like
this you can see all of the words are
from the office episode that i took as
well as the images from the office and
so it just kind of ties the whole
visualization up in a bow now i'm going
to show you how to do this step by step
before i get into that i have to say if
you want the data file the text file as
well as the links to all the tools that
i'm using please click the link in the
description down below that is going to
give you all the resources not only for
this word cloud image making session but
also the other 29 projects that i'm
doing in 29 days that are all great to
put on your data scientist or data
analyst portfolio this is available to
you all for free there's projects that
use tableau python data visualization
covering topics like animal shelters
your own linkedin data your own iphone
data and much more so go ahead and check
that out the first thing you're going to
need for this project is some sort of
text now that can be from a book it can
be from your text messages your emails
it can be from really anything but a tv
show or a movie is pretty fun in this
particular project i'm going to be
taking a script from one of my favorite
shows the office in one of my favorite
episodes which was basketball i just
love that episode i think it's hilarious
and so i selected that as my text file
but you can select whatever you want
also give you access to an awesome movie
script database in the description down
below in the resources section so make
sure you click there so here's the text
file that i'm going to use you can see
that is season 1 episode 5 basketball of
the office i'm just going to go ahead
and click on select all of this text
right here all the way down to the
bottom which it is a television episode
so it is a little bit long right and go
right here and hit ctrl c to copy it
next we're going to use a top secret
tool to create this word cloud it is
called word
art.com okay this is what i love to use
when i'm making word clouds it's just
really easy to use and free so it's fun
to use so go ahead and click create your
own and that'll bring you to this page
right here all you need to do is click
the import button at the top
choose text and go ahead and paste your
whole text file in here now i'm going to
delete this bottom because it looks like
i got a little bit too much of the text
all right and i'm going to hit import
words
so you can see right here it actually
gives me the breakdown the frequency
table where michael was said 115 times
dwight was said 46 times jim was said 40
times no was said 29 times roy was 29
times right is 26 yes 26 pam is 25 com
is 25 anyways you get the idea right i
can go ahead and just click visualize
okay and visualize will create this word
cloud for you where you have michael
dwight
jim kind of at the top right
now this is cool like we can go ahead
and just click download here if we
wanted to download this but i want to
make it as a theme of the office okay
and so what we're going to do is find an
image that we like so for instance in
this case i'm going to search the office
on google i'm going to go to images and
i'm going to find an image that i like
now this is a pretty cool image that i
used actually before i made this video
but this one kind of looks fun as well
so i'm going to actually go ahead and
try this this one looks good too gosh
there's so many good options let's try
this one so i'm going to click on this
i'm going to save this
inside of my downloads folder i'm going
to call it the office right and i'm
going to go back up to the word cloud
and i'm going to go to shapes i'm going
to add an image that image is going to
be from my computer and click the office
okay now there's some settings here that
basically effect affect the threshold of
how you have this uh image looking i
think i'm going to go like right about
there
and the edge i'll probably go high on
the edges you'll just have to like kind
of play around with this to try to
understand what it actually does that's
also true of the style down here with
the color emphasis
and the background image those are
things you'll have to play around with
to make it as pretty as you would want
it to i'm going to go ahead and hit
visualize and there we go we have our
word cloud of the office so like i said
you can kind of mess around with these
and decide how bright you want that
background image to be how much you want
the color to be emphasized i typically
think yeah right maybe right around
there is probably a good place to be
and you can go ahead and hit download
here download as a png and open it up
and voila you have created your own word
cloud of your favorite office television
episode now of course you don't have to
do this with the office television
episode you can do this with anything
that you'd like but it's pretty easy to
follow these instructions there you have
it you can take that image and put it
onto your data analyst portfolio and
have a cool story write up about it as
well if you want 29 other projects that
you can add to your portfolio please
check out this playlist over here
somewhere on this page that you can
click and you can watch a bunch of
different data science projects pick and
choose which ones are interesting to you
and i give you access to all of the data
all of the code that you need to
replicate that data hit the subscribe
button and i'll see you guys tomorrow

Title: Tableau Visualization with Your Own LinkedIn Data | Data Analyst Portfolio Project

Description: In this video, I‚Äôll walk you through how to get your own LinkedIn data and turn it into a beautiful dashboard in Tableau. This data project should take you less than an hour and would look great on your data analytics portfolio page! 

It‚Äôs also a good exercise to understand your data job hunt and how you use LinkedIn!

This is Day 5 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. I‚Äôve already done projects on animal shelters, the most famous man in the world. iPhone apps, and NFT‚Äôs.

Want to catch the whole series? Subscribe here üëá
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA


I‚Äôll be back tomorrow with another project :) 

#Tableau #DataVisualization #DataScienceProject

Video Transcript:
here's a tableau project that you could
add to your data science portfolio that
will take you less than two hours we'll
create a tableau dashboard that actually
shows the key performing indicators the
most interesting metrics of your very
own linkedin data you can make a chart
showing the most popular names within
your connections figure out who your top
buddies are by looking at how many
messages you've sent and received from
other people see what companies your
connections work at and also see your
connections over time mayan dashboard
looked something like this where i have
the leaderboard the company split the
most common names the connection chart
and i think it's pretty insightful and i
think you'll enjoy making it so let's go
ahead and hop into how do we get this
data and how can we create this
dashboard so it turns out linkedin will
actually give you all your data so go
ahead and click on your name and go to
the settings and privacy right here
then from here you're going to go ahead
and find the
data privacy
get a copy of your data
and this will have the export your data
so
i've already exported it i've recently
requested it and i can hit the download
archive but you have to request it first
so go ahead and click this download the
larger data archive including
connections contacts account history and
information okay so download that whole
thing it'll take probably about 24 hours
but you'll get an email and that email
will eventually give you this button
that'll allow you to download that
archive the archive will look like this
look how much is on here we have a ton
of csvs and a couple folders each one of
these csvs represents a different part
or feature of linkedin really and there
are some that are more important than
others one of my favorites is actually
the shares files so if you open that up
it'll basically be all of the shares or
the posts that you have done now it
isn't the most clean data set so you
might have to go through and do some
cleaning depending on what you want to
do with it but basically it actually has
all the texts from your posts as well as
the actual share link one of the ones
we'll actually be using is the messages
csv so it has a from
it has a two so if you're in a group
message or if it's just you and then it
has the actual content which will be the
the message basically that you're
sending whether what the contents are
what you're saying and then the last csv
we'll be using is the connection csv
which has the first name last name the
company and the position of all of your
connections as well as when you are
connected which will be really useful
the next step will be to get this data
inside of tableau so open up tableau
public click on the text file right here
csvs are just text files go ahead and
find your folder and you'll be able to
find your specific csv that you want to
import you'll be importing
i guess really just two for this
particular example that i'm doing the
connections and then you'll click up
here add new data source and choose a
text file once again and not add
connections but add the
messages those are the two folders that
are the most important from here we're
going to create our new dashboard so the
first thing we're going to do is click
down here new dashboard and you can just
call it whatever you'd like dashboard1
for example we're also going to create
some graphs let's start with the message
leaderboard graph so what we need to do
is basically take the name which is
basically going to be the from we're
going to drag that over here okay and
then we're going to have the uh name as
well be up here but just know this is
going to throw a
something terrible right we don't like
that at all we want to change it to
account and so now we have the from and
we have the count
we can basically click this guy right
here which will sort the whole thing for
us you can see it goes avery smith and
then tom ives and then ashish patel and
joe reese and all this good stuff
robert as well susan but this actually
includes a lot of group messages and
myself so what i'm going to do is i'm
actually going to put the filter on the
uh
title here and i'm just doing null
basically you'll have a title if it's an
inmail or if it's a group message so i'm
going to hit okay so these are non-group
message now i don't know why there's
messages from me i guess these are the
messages that i have sent so i also want
to make sure that the from does not
include me so i'm going to do from
oops sorry i think i did that wrong the
from right here
and we're going to select from list and
it is going to be all and then i just
need to find uh basically except for me
so av
and then let's find my name and then hit
okay apply okay and there we go there we
have kate strichny we have member we
have andrew so on and so forth we might
want to also add the count of the from
as a label right here so go ahead and
add that and change it from from to a
count okay and there we go we have our
same chart that we had created on my
dashboard there see that
did that so easily in a new sheet i want
to basically make the same chart but
just with the first names so once again
i'm going to have the first name be the
rows
now this is this is quite a bit right so
that's going to be kind of a problem so
one of the things i did first was just
like filter and just say it's like a
couple names so just say it's none and
then maybe choose a couple of these
doesn't really matter which hit okay
and then i'm going to do the first name
up here as well and i'm going to do a
count
so that should have the counts of these
first names and then i'm going to kill
this filter remove
make sure we sort
by descending and there we go we have a
ton of michaels
we have a ton of david's muhammad
mohammed's rahul all that good stuff you
can go ahead and drag the first name
into the label and change it to count as
well
so that you have
the counts there just in case you were
curious so that is sheet2 and we can
rename it as the first name count
move the sheet to the left one and
create a new sheet this will be where
our connections work so i like to make i
made this one a tree map and to make one
of those we're going to drag on the
company into rows i'm going to go ahead
and add all 5000 here we'll filter here
in a second and we're going to make the
size based upon the count of that
company right because that will show how
many people are in that company that are
connected with me so if i go count you
start to see that like for instance 3m
has a bigger dot of 6 then 3d micro and
doe which has one
but this isn't that entertaining this is
all just like one row if we come over
here to the show me in the top right
corner right click that right there
we can click on the tree map and that
will automatically generate which is
awesome so here's our tree map with all
these different companies and it used a
color gradient for the company size so
we can also go to the company label
and change it to a measure right
the count but we also want to make sure
we add it back to the label
and so that we have the company and then
the amount of connections we have from
that company so i have 329 from exxon
and 213 from
tata if i go back and look that's
basically what this chart looks right
here except for instead of the count
being
or the color being a count we can go
back to the dimension that'll have a
bunch of different colors and so what i
actually just did was put a filter on
the company specifically in a condition
where the company count was greater than
something like i don't know 15 and hit
okay and that should really wow
oh i said equals to 15 didn't i huh i
was like that really narrowed it down
come back up here one more time go to
the edit filter instead of equals we
want the greater than so if you are
curious which
what companies i have 15 connections
with that is the answer if we want
greater hit apply
okay there you go so this chart right
here looks a little bit more similar to
what we have on our finished dashboard
we'll give this sheet a name and we will
call it the company breakdown or
something like that breakdown
i like to move it to the left just so i
have my dashboard on the right and then
i'll click new sheet and this sheet
right here we're going to go to the
connections and we're going to use the
date okay so connected on
is going to be the row okay and then
basically what we're going to be doing
is having something like the first name
being the columns now that's going to be
really stressful so once again we're
going to add a little quick little
filter where we're just taking a couple
people just to get started okay
um this is just so it doesn't crash or
anything like that and so i can work
with a smaller data set instead of being
the year we want to go ahead and make it
like the week number so for instance
week 5 2015 or something like that just
to split it up
and
we want to set a first name we want to
make it a count of the first name
basically so a count of the first name
and actually it looks like i want to
switch these two so it will be yep
perfect so that's exactly what we want
it to look like and now if we remove
this filter so if i just hit remove
we will get this right here which
basically has the date as the x-axis and
the count of new connections on the
y-axis no this is not followers this is
just connections
and so for instance you can see
on this week
january 4th 2021 i had 1400 new
connections
now this is interesting i like this
graph a lot this is a really powerful
graph
but what i had on the finished dashboard
looked a little bit different and notice
this is a cumulative connection chart
it's like a running total and so if we
go up here to the count and we go to the
quick table and we go to running total
we'll see that we're able to get that
entire
cumulative and also another thing i did
on this was just add a quick little
filter specifically on a range of dates
that was from when i actually started
posting on linkedin which was about i
don't know
this date right here and there you go
that is my connection chart and that is
what you'll see finished right here so
i'll go ahead and call this the
connection chart
right here move it over to the left hand
side and we we're done we have the
message leaderboard the first name
company breakdown and connection chart
i'll go ahead and go to the dashboard
and i can actually just you know change
the size of the dashboard i like to keep
it as a fixed size specifically for
generic desktop
now i can just go in and pull
these guys in make sure that they're
floating okay so you can control the
size a little bit i'm going to redo that
one and make sure that it comes in as
floating there you go so you control the
size i like to put this guy
you can put them wherever you want and
however you want i like to put this on
the left hand side
i'll put the
first name count on the right names the
right hand side something like
this
yeah
maybe make a little bit more room here
and then i put the company breakdown
in the middle i don't love that it has i
don't think we need this
uh because if you scroll over for most
of them you'll be able to get the names
and then we'll throw the connection
chart down below
perfect we're pretty much done we've
we've done it that is our dashboard make
sure you hit ctrl s to save it and
publish it to tableau public
but that's it we created an awesome
dashboard in less than basically 10
minutes this project was part of a
series i'm doing it is 30 data science
project in 30 days so you can check out
all of those videos in a playlist right
here somewhere on the screen and i have
awesome projects in python and data
visualization and i'll be doing stuff in
tableau power bi r sql excel you name
the tool we'll be doing a project with
it but here's the coolest part for every
project that i'm doing i'm making it all
open source all you need to do is click
the link just in the description down
below and you'll get access to data
files code everything you need to do to
try to recreate these projects that i'm
doing for absolutely free so what are
you waiting for click the link in the
description down below i'm going to bed
now

Title: NFT Data Analytics Project with Python Pandas

Description: Day 4 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. Today, I built a simple Python Pandas dataframe that explored the most overvalued purchases of the NFT project The Bored Ape Yacht Club, and we exposed who made this purchase...(hint: Justin Bieber)


üëâ Subscribe to my channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

I'm building 30 data science project in 30 days! Watch all 30 projects here: https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLo0oTKi2fPNiMBo2hXreEetXCXev170ZZ

Shoutout to @OneTheMarkData for helping me get this NFT data set

See you tomorrow with Day 5!

#Python #nft #datascienceproject

Video Transcript:
nfts or non-fungible tokens is one of
the hottest topics and with some of the
hottest assets in 2022. i made a lot of
money trading them and then lost most of
it so in today's video we're going to
talk about how to do nft analytics how
to actually get nft data and do some
simple analysis with the data we're
going to look at the board ape yacht
club which was one of the biggest and
still to this day is one of the biggest
nfg projects out there and we're going
to see who the biggest winners and the
biggest losers are by the way if you are
new here my name is avery smith and i am
building 30 data science projects in 30
days and i'm trying to give you guys all
of the resources the data and any code
files that i have you can check those
out by checking the description down
below and by the way i have a brand new
course out on how to make projects where
i take all of these ideas all these data
sets are found inside of the course you
can check that in the link description
down below
so basically
i should do a project every day and
today i've actually had a really busy
day watch this i am driving to salt lake
city to go hang out with a lot of
awesome data content creators so today's
really busy i don't know when the heck
i'm gonna have time to do a project
hopefully i can make time guys it is 9
13 p.m
and i haven't even started the project
so i really need to bust this out quick
now one of the reasons i'm doing this
challenge is to hopefully be an
inspiration to you guys that if i can do
30 data science projects in 30 days you
can do one in 30 days and sometimes that
means even when you're with your friends
i have like 20 of my friends over in in
next door and they're all going hot
tubbing right now all my data friends
but i need to make a video i need to
make a project i need to have it done so
hopefully you guys can take some
inspiration for that but let's go ahead
and hop into an nft crash course for
just next 30 seconds nfts are basically
digital assets you can buy them trade
them sell them on the internet they're
all hosted on the blockchain and many of
them have been like little animals they
don't necessarily need to be but that's
what they've been the hope is to buy
these digital assets when they're
undervalued and then sell them when they
are overvalued you can make some money
so i got this data set from my friend
mark freeman you can definitely go check
out his youtube channel and is a great
content creator on linkedin in the data
space
and it is called the nft analyst starter
pack which was created by a company
that andreas in horowitz owns it's
called ada16 or something like that
this tool allows you to download the
transfers the sales and the metadata of
different nft projects with just the
contract address and you can export it
via csv you'd actually think getting nft
data would be really easy because it's
all on the blockchain but it's actually
quite difficult and there's not a whole
lot of resources that allow you to bulk
export nft data that at least is free
this tool is one of the free tools that
allows you to do that
mark helped me get it get that data it
isn't the easiest tool to use but
definitely check it out i'll have the
link to that tool inside of the
link description down below sign up for
the resources and the resources will
include that link to the data set we're
going to try to find the people who
benefited the most who are the winners
and we'll find the losers too for the
board ape yacht club we're going to be
analyzing that project so let's go ahead
and hop into it guys obviously i'm not
in my usual office i am at this data
science creator meetup so we're staying
at this airbnb and i had to bring my
laptop and my laptop's really old and
apparently it's so old that it is having
a hard time running python as you can
see i'm unable to launch an encounter
navigator i don't know spider's not
working
so this is what happens sometimes when
you're trying to make projects is you
run into big big roadblocks like this
but i'm going to push through it you can
see it's 10 45. i'm really going to try
to get this project done
but man i don't know if i'm going to be
able to do it update i just tried
launching jupiter notebook from my
terminal and i got it to open somehow so
we're gonna be doing this project in
jupyter notebook so when doing a project
one of the first things i try to do is
think as the questions i'm actually
trying to answer in this case we don't
have a lot of time i have three bullet
points that i'm trying to answer who
overpaid the most for rarity so like who
bought an nfc spent a lot of money and
they overpaid for what they actually got
okay two who owns the most i think it's
always interesting to see how many they
own who that person is and three what is
the biggest winning trades and losing
trades who's someone that you know
bought an nft for cheap and sold it for
expensive or bought expensive and sold
for cheap stuff like that so the next
step was to actually import the data we
have three csvs that comes from this
data set the sales the metadata and the
transfer data so quickly looking at the
sales you have the transaction has hash
the date
the asset id this is going to be like
the thing that identifies the individual
nft
you have the seller and the buyer
as well as the taker and i think the
buyer and the taker should be about the
same you have the sales price in eth and
the sales price in usd
then for the metadata you have the asset
id so note that the asset id up here can
be joined with the asset id here and
that'll basically give it an attribute
count rarity score hat rarity score
background rarity score all these
different clothes what they're wearing
it's basically descriptions about the
actual nft but finally at the end there
is an overall rarity score which we'll
be using okay
next we have the transfer data and this
is when something was not sold it was
transferred which means it was basically
sent from one wallet to another i don't
know if we're actually really going to
use this all that much we're going to
use the metadata and the sales data a
lot more so i started by taking on the
question about who overpaid the most for
what they got so who got the worst nft
for the most money that sort of ratio
right there so what i did is i needed to
join the sales and the metadata so in
the metadata we have this awesome column
right here called the overall rarity
score and then of course in the sales
data we have that sales price which i
did in usd
now so i needed to join those two i
joined those two once i had both of
those columns i could then take the
sales price and divide it by the overall
rarity score so that the higher the uh
the sales price and the lower the score
the higher the dollar per rarity which
basically means you got a less of a deal
the lower the number here so for
instance if you paid very little and you
had a high score you would have a low
number so low number equals good bad
number equals high i then also wanted to
create a column that would basically
take you to the open c openc is like
basically where nfts are stored you can
see them and so i created a url creator
that would basically add
a link to each one of these assets
then i found the top 10 lowest values
which is actually the top 10 highest
values in terms of the dollar priority
score and i showed that in a table down
below so for instance this particular
asset 1859
has a dollar priority score of it looks
like 15 000 so pretty high
the asset is 3001 and the sales price
looks like a 1.2 million
which
only had a rarity score of 78 nine
so this was paid a lot for and it
doesn't have a high rarity score
let me go ahead and click on the link
right here and see this nft
and see who owns it in this case it is
actually justin bieber so justin bieber
bought this because it reminds him of
himself it's like a lonely like his
album and his song and he's crying i
don't know so he thought this uh ape
kind of resembled him and looked like
him so even though it wasn't rare he
decided that he wanted to pay quite a
bit for it and we do that with the other
nfts as well we can see that these were
all paid it looks like 2.8 million two
points or sorry 2.1 2.8 2.8 is a lot
this was a pretty rare one but it was
pretty expensive you see that it is
kind of this golden monkey with this hat
on
we can see some of these other ones for
instance this was looks like 390 000
for a not that rare actually let's do
this one this is 428 000
for not that rare let's go ahead and
take a look at it it's owned by happy
song it looks like a pretty plain monkey
if you ask me we can click on this right
here and that'll take us to this owner's
i'm not exactly sure if this is someone
famous or not they definitely have these
are all really good nfts right here so
they have some good stuff in their
storage now i'm going to teach you a
valuable principle that i really
emphasize in my course data science
project studio which is brand new linked
in the description
but that is a finished project is the
best project that you can do
now i originally set out to answer three
questions i wanted to talk about
overpaying for rarity who owns the most
of the board ape yacht club and the
biggest winning and losing trades of
this series like who's actually made a
really big flip on the board yacht club
and that was my original goal when i set
out but now it is 11 28 pm
i'm really tired i have a big day
tomorrow as i have office hours for mit
that i teach and i also have a big day
spending more time with data science
content creators in salt lake city on
this kind of retreat that i'm on
and i'm tired and i still have to post
this youtube video and do all the
details
so instead of finishing the project
later you know instead of doing who owns
the most and the biggest winning in
trading loses i'm actually just going to
call the project good right now i'm
going to publish it as it is yes i know
i didn't cover that much but this is an
interesting analysis that we did and
it's much better to actually have it
being published than not published at
all so there's a lesson here
the best data science project is one
that you finish and of course i didn't
actually finish this one but instead of
having it sit on my machine and just you
know stay there for days i'm going to be
brave and i'm going to publish what i
have and i can always come back to it
and add to it if i want to so i'm going
to go ahead and publish this youtube
video as is and you'll have all the
resources in the link in the description
down below but obviously i didn't
actually finish it and you guys can take
this project and try to answer those two
questions and make it your own and
publish it as your own data science
project this project took me about two
hours to do to get all the data to plan
the story and to actually do the python
analysis so it could probably take you
about the same now i want to give a
shout out to mark freeman once again
helping me get this data set go ahead
and check out his channel and the link
in the description down below also you
guys can watch all the rest of these
videos over here please subscribe and
i'll see you guys tomorrow

Title: Beginner Data Visualization Portfolio Project using Observe, Collect, Draw

Description: Day 3 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. In today's video, you'll see how to hand-draw a beautiful data visualization about the apps we have on our phone. We'll use the data viz book, Observe, Collect, Draw by Giorgia Lupi & Stefanie Posavec. 

This project is an easy, unique data visualization project that would stand out on any portfolio when applying to jobs like data analyst, business intelligence developer, or data visualization specialist. 

üìó Observe, Collect, Draw has 47 other data life prompts. Check it out here: https://www.amazon.com/Observe-Collect-Draw-Visual-Journal/dp/1616897147


üëâ Subscribe to watch all 30 data projects in 30 days:
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

I'll see you guys tomorrow for Day 4 üëÄ

#datavisualization #datascienceproject #datascience

Video Transcript:
this is one of my favorite data
visualization books ever and in today's
project i'll be using it to create an
awesome beautiful handmade data
visualization all about what i have on
this my phone this project is an easy
unique data visualization project that
would go well on anyone's portfolio
especially if you're trying to become a
data analyst a business intelligence
analyst or developer or a database
specialist this would look great on your
resume it should be an easy project for
you it should only take you about one
hour and it is only one out of 47
different prompts and projects inside of
this book observe collect draw which is
cool because if you didn't know i'm
trying to build 30 data science projects
in 30 days this one has 47 different
projects that i could do but why am i
trying to do this well it's hopefully
supposed to inspire you and give you
some ideas my idea is if i can do 30
data science projects in 30 days that
you guys can do one data science project
in 30 days i'm posting all 30 projects
on my youtube so the best way that you
can follow along is hitting the
subscribe button and the bell so you get
notified so you don't miss any of the 30
projects as well as you if you want to
do this on your own in the link in the
description down below you can actually
get taken to the resources page where
i'm giving away all of the code the
files the resources the write-ups the
examples all for free you can get access
to that for free by just clicking that
link down below in the description data
visualization is a big part of a data
career because it helps take numbers and
data tables and actually transform it
into a way that we as humans can
understand and it becomes tangible to us
one of the big pitfalls as humans is
that we're lazy when it comes to data
visualizations we use a bunch of
different softwares to just create these
visualizations and those softwares don't
always have best data visualization
principles and practices in place
meaning they're not always the best data
vis or the most aesthetic database this
book helps us realize that data is
everywhere including in the details of
our personal lives and it helps us break
our default choices when creating data
visualizations and helps us make very
beautiful very fun very aesthetic data
visualizations the project that we'll be
doing today comes from prompt number
four which is all about the apps that
you have on your phone and before i show
you the prompt in detail let's first
brainstorm what potential questions or
data could even be found about our apps
and our phone what are we wondering what
would be interesting to know so go ahead
and pause this video and think what data
could be found with the apps in our
phone what is something that you'd like
to know about the apps on your phone
okay hopefully you took some time to
think these are the questions i came up
with how many apps do we have on our
phone what color are those apps what are
the apps like what type of categories
are there in um how often do we use that
app when was the last time we used it do
we pay did we pay for it was it free or
what's the split do we have a lot of
paid apps a lot of free apps and how do
we feel about the app do we love it do
we hate it are we embarrassed by it
hopefully you came up with some good
questions as well but these questions
are pretty much the exact questions that
we're going to tackle with this prompt
the prompt is over here on the left hand
side and our visualization canvas is
over here on the right hand side so each
one of these little circles over here
represents an app on our phone and we'll
take each of them and record traits
about that app for starters each will
have a color and that color represents
what type of app it is so for instance
like a photo app or a video app or a
social media app or maybe like a fitness
app or a work app stuff like that next
we will go ahead and add a shape these
types of shapes right here and those
shapes represent how often we use that
app so for instance if we just use a
single dot that will represent um i've
never used it if we fill it in the whole
time that is using it the whole time
okay does that make sense then we have
these three in-betweens that represent
once or twice occasionally or
semi-regularly we'll also add any
external apps that we're embarrassed of
we'll add this external circle which
will show that we are embarrassed by
those apps i'm not sure if i have any of
those but we'll see okay and then
finally we'll add some small captions
some little text that basically records
some memorable apps okay i stole my
wife's colored pencils right here and
i've went ahead and gone through all of
the different categories i think i'm
going to need i have black as photo and
video social media nutrition and diet is
green fitness is yellow entertainment is
purple utilities is brown and business
is blue okay time to look at my apps the
first app i have in the top left right
here is the gmail app i'm going to count
that as a business app so the first
thing i'm going to do is take out that
business blue right because we have
business blue here i'm going to come up
here i'm going to decide what shape i
use it honestly i use that nearly every
day nearly every hour nearly every
minute so i'm going to go
all the time right here starting with
that gmail app okay i'm not embarrassed
about it so i don't really need to add a
circle any details no i think i'm okay
so we have a business app that i use all
the time that's the first one and done
there we go i just finished my entire
phone actually not my entire phone there
was probably two or three pages of apps
that i didn't do because i ran out of
circles on this page so that's what i
wrote down my key takeaway from this was
i have way too many apps this is
ridiculous i should probably delete some
especially these that just have like the
single dots up here that's one of my big
takeaways i did this in order of how
they are on my phone which is in no
order i just kind of download apps uh
but like for instance i use gmail a lot
so that was that was good and i used
linkedin and that's that's up there as
well but like look at all these brown
single dots that i just don't use these
are just utility apps that for some
reason take up my home page and my first
page of apps so i don't really
understand why i need those
look at the calculator though i love to
use the calculator i'm addicted to
instagram and youtube and netflix
honestly you know what netflix is
probably this the thing about netflix is
i don't use it at all and then one of my
favorite shows has a new series that
comes out and then my screen time is
like 10 hours a week for for that that
week so i don't know i have my strava
which i really like to use my smart
scale the gym app that i use all trails
i love to hike
i love to use the loset app to try to
lose weight but like look at this guys
there is so many single dots i have way
too many apps and hopefully one of my
big takeaways from this is i'm going to
delete some of these honestly that whole
process was pretty relaxing and a pretty
fun project and i feel like i learned
quite a bit about my app and my phone
and i realized well i have a lot of junk
on my phone that i don't actually need
or want so i'm gonna try to go through
and clean up those apps just a little
bit and that's the coolest part about
data is it actually can help us make
better decisions and in this case better
life decisions which is so awesome
because we're learning data we're
practicing data and we're improving and
optimizing our lives so i think that is
a double win if you ask me so hopefully
you can go and recreate your own project
and look at your own apps and create
your own data visualization i highly
recommend this book observe collect draw
it has 47 different projects of how you
can see data in your own life and it
really has improved my data
visualization skills i'll have a link to
it down below in the description and
while you're down there go ahead and
click the link to get all of the
resources for the 30 projects it's going
to be really awesome i'm going to have
all my code data files write-ups all
that good stuff in there so definitely
check that out it's totally free so why
not if you haven't seen day one's
project or day two's project make sure
you click the box somewhere on the
screen that will have the playlist to
all 30 projects and that concludes day
three i'll see you tomorrow and we'll
make another project

Title: Is Andrew Tate The Most Googled Man? (Beginner Data Science Project w/ Google Trends)

Description: Day 2 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. Today, I built a animated data visualization that explains the most famous men on planet Earth.

Specifically, it covers is Andrew Tate THE most Googled man? Or Elon? Or Trump? Or Biden! Watch to find out.

Big thanks to @ShashankData for his time and helping with this video


üëâ Subscribe to watch all 30 data projects in 30 days: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

#datavisualization #datascienceproject #datascience

Video Transcript:
i'm exhausted i just published day one's
video
it took me
many hours to do and i can't believe i
have to do the same thing today
and the same thing
the next 28 days after that this is hard
so in case you're new here my name's
avery smith and over the next 30 days
i'm doing something that no data
scientist has ever done before and that
is building 30 full data science
projects in 30 days and today is day two
i'm really excited about the product i'm
building today and i can't wait to share
with you guys but first i need to go
brush my teeth and eat breakfast and
like do all that stuff so i'll be right
back okay i'm back and today's video i'm
so excited we're covering someone who
has gone quite viral recently you may
have seen him on instagram or tiktok not
my favorite person on earth but check
him out andrew tate now if you've never
heard of andrew tate before joined the
club i hadn't either he's a former
kickboxing world champion and now is
more famous for posting selfies without
a shirt having really big muscles saying
very sexist and controversial things on
the internet in interviews and smoking
cigars and having nice sports cars and
proclaiming to be very rich and very
famous now i am not the biggest andrew
tate fan i think he says some things
that are pretty outlandish and pretty
sexist but you cannot disagree this
person has gone completely viral over
the last few months and if you open up
tick tock instagram you're probably
going to find him somewhere on your page
now recently in an interview andrew tate
said this and i am now the most famous
man on the planet i'm more googled than
donald trump joe biden look it up i'm
more i'm the most googled man on the
planet really yeah that's fact
donald trump joe
and that is exactly what we are going to
do today is andrew tate the most googled
person on the planet or is he lying
we're about to find out this is what the
end product will eventually look like
but before we get to there i want to
show you how i got the data and how to
do this entire project first let's talk
about google google is the biggest
search engine out there and we google
everything right and here's the cool
thing about google is they actually let
you take a peek behind the curtain and
understand what people are googling when
and actually give you some of that data
it's called google trends and you can
access it at trends.google.com
and you can go ahead and see it shows
you what states are searching taylor
swift more than kim kardashian where the
world cup is the most popular to search
in the world
where people search football versus
american football more these are just a
couple of examples that you can check
out on google trends and the coolest
part is that you can actually enter a
search term or topic yourself so for
this particular example we are
interested in andrew tate so we can type
in andrew
tate
and go ahead and see how many people are
googling andrew tate and so this is
andrew state interest over time for the
past 12 months now this number on the
y-axis right here it says interest over
time what that really means is it is
just some made-up normalized number that
google uses to be able to show you
relative interest in a certain topic and
that explains right here if you click
this this number represents a interest
relative to the highest point of the
chart for a given region and time a
value of 100 is the peak popularity for
the term a value of 50 means that the
term is half as popular a score of zero
means there is not enough data for this
term and so what this really means is
this number doesn't actually really mean
anything it's not how many millions of
views or times it was searched it's just
a made-up number that's supposed to
represent
the interest over time but the cool
thing is is you can actually compare
this search term to another search term
so for example we can also add joe biden
into the mix and see what that search
term looks like over the last 12 months
and what you'll actually see is wow
there's actually been a lot of searches
for joe biden the peak was at this
october 31st through november 6 area
and spoiler alert you can see at the
very end here the last week andrew tate
has been more googled than joe biden we
can also add other people like uh donald
trump for instance
donald trump by adding right there and
we can add up to five different things
so another person that we might want to
add is elon musk
and the last person that we might want
to add is will smith so we can add will
smith these are five popular men that
you know might be searched more often
than andrew tate what you can see when
we're looking at the last 12 months
that we're actually these numbers are
comparable these five people we can
compare once we can no we can't compare
more than five people at once so we can
only compare zero to five people
and we can see that wow that will smith
was the most googled from march 27th to
april 2nd so all five of these numbers
are all relative and they are comparable
what's really cool about this is you can
actually change the time so that's the
past 12 months well what about the past
five years
once again that will show you all the
data last five years so for instance i'm
assuming this is when the election was
for joe biden and donald trump but that
is nowhere as close as the will smith
incident so that was very very googlable
people were really googling that we
could also change it to the last week
which will be the focus of our study and
see how these people were googled over
the past week on like an hourly basis
now google trends actually does have
that data visualization those line
graphs already baked into the platform
which is really awesome because you
don't actually need to go anywhere else
to finish your analysis to view the
actual data it views it for you so we
really appreciate it but it's not
necessarily the most eye capturing
captivating story and what i really like
to do with these time series where you
have people just switching positions and
becoming more popular and less popular
is actually animate it across like a
visualization and animate the actual
race the story it just lightens things
up and makes it more interesting so all
you need to do is choose what time
period you want and you can click this
download button right here and that will
download this as a csv now that csv is
ready to go and ready to use this is
what it will kind of look like where it
will have the time as a column and then
your different characters up here and
then the values of the interest over
time in the different cells and that's
all good and dandy but for what i know
what we're going to do i actually just
want to transpose this and i don't
really agree with this but the platform
i'm going to use that i'll get to here
in a second wants the time to be y
columns okay so what i'm going to do is
just copy all of this by using shift
control right shift control down control
c
go up here and open up a new sheet and
you can go ahead and just use the edit
the paste special transpose and now
you'll have all of the
columns be the dates and these rows are
the different characters that we
selected i'm then going to use this tool
called flourish so go to flourish.studio
this is a free tool that you can use to
make beautiful data visualizations they
have awesome resources so go ahead and
sign up for an account i'm just going to
go ahead and sign in i'm going to click
new visualization up here i'm going to
scroll down until i find the animated
line charts they call them line chart
races i'm going to go ahead and choose
the simple okay
if you choose that it'll automatically
populate with its pre-template which
automatically has the x-axis up here and
we're viewing some sort of i don't know
time series data where stuff goes up and
down now we can replace this data with
our own data so all you need to do is
click on the data tab up here at the
right hand side go to your transporters
data which i have done in
google sheets you can do this in excel
use shift
control down shift control right ctrl c
for copy and just go ahead and click on
the top cell here and paste the top cell
now that will go ahead and have your
entire time series with the different
characters make sure the label is that
first uh
column here we can call them persons
and then also make sure you delete any
of the remaining old data that might be
there so and then the label should be a
it should go b to z and if you go back
to the preview you should now see the
new data set with elon musk andrew tate
donald trump
will smith and joe biden and have it be
this animated bar chart now obviously
this is really slow so you can come down
to the animation side right here and
lower this to something like 100 and
that should speed it up quite a bit we
can change this to 100 as well i think
that will make it a little bit faster
and you can see that is our animation
right here now you can go ahead and do
some fancy things like instead of having
the x-axis at the top you can put it at
the bottom you can change the angle of
these you can change the colors you can
add these to have pictures if you go
back to the data you'll see that you can
add an image right here so if i wanted
to do that i would basically just insert
a column to the right i can call it
image or something like that and then if
you give a url of the actual images so
i've already done that on this other one
so these are just different urls of
those people's images hopefully that is
in the right order yep that looks right
i can paste those in and choose this to
be the image column
i can go back to the preview and there
we go we have the images right there
also it comes default with you can click
this and it will restart the entire
animation or if instead you want to have
the scores you want to have the ranks as
in first place second place third place
fourth place stuff like that you can
click this ranks right here and that'll
switch it to first place second place
third place fourth place fifth base now
let you see that actually andrew tate
has been first place over the last
couple days at different times of the
day
really just switching back and forth
with elon musk for the most part joe
biden did have about an hour where he
was the most searched but
um oh i guess will smith did as well so
all of them except for donald trump had
their their moment of being the most
famous google man of the entire earth
after cleaning up the graph i was able
to make this i gave it a title and a
little subtitle that kind of explains
wow is andrew tate the most google map
on earth let's take a look
and we can i made these pictures just a
little bit bigger so you can actually
see
and it's true andrew tate is the most
googled man on earth according to this
data
at different times he has beat out elon
musk and joe biden and will smith and
donald trump so i guess he was not wrong
in the podcast that's kind of surprising
but who knew after making this cool
graph i wanted to share with someone and
who better to share it with than the
data youtuber shashank because he knows
a ton about pop culture and history so i
gave him a call would you say andrew tay
is famous very extremely in in no time
at all i think in like six months he
like rose to become more famous than mr
b do you think andrew tate is the most
searched person on google today uh
august 2nd i would you know or like you
know around this time frame i would not
be surprised if he was more than joe
biden unfortunately yes i think so i
have made a data visualization i have
done the analysis shashank to find out
if he if he truly is the most googled
man on earth does this graph show you
shashank that andrew tate is the most
googled male on planet earth uh it so
he's way up there
and
yeah yeah as of today i would say yes so
he is the dark blue line
and i would say
i would argue that elon musk is probably
higher on average but i think if you
extrapolate this data for another
week or two andrew tate would probably
beat him um
but yeah if i was to guess i would say i
think elon musk is just edging him out
but barely shashank and i then you went
back to google trends and tried to find
some other people that might be more
famous and more searched than andrew
tate we tried actually beyonce who just
released an album this week and she was
way more popular than andrew tate we
also went further back in time and tried
people like alec baldwin or taylor swift
and they were a lot more searched than
andrew tate as well so was andrew tate
lying
not really he is really popular right
now according to google trends and now
you have an awesome template to do any
sort of project you do this by the most
popular sports the most popular sports
players maybe you do different nba
players or different soccer players like
as they score goals or are transferred
or stuff like that you can do this with
musicians as they release albums google
trends and flourish animations is a
winning combination that you could
potentially create
hundreds of projects on and really make
cool projects that people will care
about so that is it for today's project
if you want all of the files and the
code as well as some other project ideas
of how you can spin this off please
click the description down below so you
can get all of the code resources for
all 30 days for absolutely free make
sure you subscribe and hit the bell so
you do not miss any of these videos and
i appreciate you guys i will see you
guys tomorrow for day three

Title: Analyzing Animal Shelter Data with Plotly Dash Python (Full Data Science Project)

Description: Day 1 of building 30 data science projects in 30 days. Today, I built a multipage Dash web application in Python for @Plotly & @CharmingData that highlights the Austin Animal Shelter Data.

If you're new here, I'm building 30 full data science projects in 30 days! 

üëã Build Dash apps like this using Dash Docs: https://dash.plotly.com


üëâ Subscribe to watch all 30 data projects in 30 days: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA

üí™ Enter your version of this challenge to Plotly's Summer App Challenge: https://community.plotly.com/t/summer-community-app-challenge/65099/2

Big shout out to Adam Schroeder (Plotly Community Manager) for issuing the challenge, and helping me deploy the app to Heroku. You can find Adam's YouTube Channel here: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCqBFsuAz41sqWcFjZkqmJqQ

#datascience #datascienceproject #plotly #python

Video Transcript:
welcome to day one of building 30 data
science projects in 30 days i'm so glad
you're here if you don't know who i am
my name is avery smith and i'm a data
scientist over the next 30 days i'm
going to be doing something that no
other data scientist has ever done
before and that is building 30 data
science projects in 30 days for day one
i actually got challenged by one of my
favorite data companies plotly and if
you didn't know i'm a data science
consultant and so for a lot of my
consulting jobs i actually use plot
lease and plot lease products quite a
bit so it's near and dear to my heart so
i reached out to adam schroeder who is
actually the community manager at
plotley and we had a conversation i sent
him a message explaining what i was
doing and asked if he had a challenge
for me and a challenge he gave me he
asked me to create a multi-page dash
application with animal shelter data
adams sent me a link to the data via
kaggle and by the way you can get access
to all of the data all of the code files
that i do by clicking the description
link down below that gets you access to
all of the resources with that i was
ready to create the thumbnail and the
title for the video and with that i'm
ready to start the project so i'll go
ahead and click start on my project
timer and give myself around 8 to 10
hours to complete this project hopefully
i'll do it faster as a reminder here are
the challenge rules i only have 24 hours
for each project that's why i started a
timer i have to have a special guest
today's special guest is adam each
project must be posted by noon the next
day on youtube and of course i have to
share the project and files with you
guys as well as for every thousand
subscribers i gain i have to do an
additional day that's a new rule i just
added that so go ahead and press the
subscribe button if you want me to do
more than 30 projects i'm a little
nervous how big this can be but hey
prove me wrong shove it in my face make
me do more projects so here's the data
set in kaggle it is the austin animal
center shelter intakes and outcomes we
can scroll down to the csv i did the
full intakes and outcomes this has both
animals coming in and animals leaving in
kaggle we can select all of the columns
hit apply and that'll show us all 41
columns inside of kaggle which i really
enjoy so here are the different columns
so we have the age upon outcome which
basically means the animal got adopted
or died or something like that date of
birth
we have the outcome type which you see
at 42 was adoptions 30 was transfers
some of these are return to owner
the sax upon outcome age upon outcome
in years and in days
the looks like a range as well the date
the month the year
the weekday the hour the outcome number
the date of birth of the year the date
of birth of the month the date of birth
of the month year so lots of different
columns you can see right here and you
can go ahead and click on the resources
and get access to this link and you can
see all of these we also have the intake
stuff like for instance was it a stray
was it a public assist was it a normal
was it injured was it aged where was it
at what part of austin what color is it
what breed is it
whether it's a cat whether it's a dog
whether it was left on a monday at 6 p.m
all that good stuff we have all these
different columns available to us inside
of this csv and so with this project we
know we want to use dash which is
basically you can create a dashboard as
a web application
with python and have a bunch of cool
stuff in it we want to ask some
important questions of this data set
some things that might be useful for
this animal shelter to know if they were
a business if they're an organization
what would they want to know how could
their data help them make better
decisions with these animals to have
better outcomes so i sat down and tried
to come up with as many interesting
business questions as i possibly could
based off of the columns that i have in
the data set so something i was
interested in is what was the average
time that an animal spent in the shelter
and
how does that differ by the animal type
the cat dog how does that differ by the
age what day of the week is the shelter
the most busy what month has the most
intakes or the outtakes
how old are the animals when they're
donated right you think probably maybe
older animals are donating more often
how are the intakes happening like what
are the different categories of you know
donated or found stray stuff like that
maybe color plays a role maybe people
just like you know red cats more uh does
the breed play a role um my wife and i
have a golden doodle we love golden
doodles if we ever get another dog we
would love to adopt a golden doodle
are there more dogs or more cats do dogs
get adopted faster than cats how many
animals are donated each day so these
are just some of the questions i just
you know wrote down and straight bullets
pointed i didn't have the chance to
answer all of them
these green check marks were kind of the
ones that i ended up answering but
that's one of the first steps in a
project that i talk about inside of my
course is like list a bunch of
interesting business questions that you
potentially would think would be
interesting to know the answer to and so
that's what i did here is just list down
as many questions as i possibly could
before i actually get into my analysis
and what i ended up making i want to
explain what dash actually is so plotly
is a company that makes an open source
graphing
library called plotly hence the name
plotly and these are some of the cool
graphs that you can make scatter plot
line plot bar charts histograms disc
plots all these different scientific
charts you can make ternary plots log
plots contour plots there's so many cool
things that you can make with plotly and
i'll go ahead and show you what makes
plotley really cool is for instance if
we go to the scatter plots these are
interactive and easily done with python
so you can see that this scatter plot is
done with just really just three lines
of code and you can do so many cool
things like for instance this one has
differing very uh styles and that has
these hover tips so these are
interactive graphs where if i you know
scroll over them i get to see different
things which is really cool so these are
really easy to make using plotly now
plotly has another library in python
called dash and dash is short for
dashboard basically and dash is a really
easy way to make web applications or
dashboards using python and so i'm here
in the dash gallery which you guys can
definitely check out and there's so many
cool things that you can do with this so
for instance this is real time object
detection that is made in dash and this
is all using python so what's really
cool is you can like select certain
things
and you know do next frame previous
frame like these are really these are
much more than the power bi or tableau
type of dashboards you can do all sorts
of different machine learning in this
case they're doing object detection
you can click random frame you know find
a frame containing a car or something
like that and there you go there is
apparently a car of sorts but i really
love this you can go through these
different libraries this is one of my
favorite ones the clinical
analytics right here which is basically
looking at hospitals and seeing how busy
the emergency and cardiology rooms are
it lets you choose these dates you know
you could select different sources maybe
click off some different things see how
things change maybe we try you know the
whole month versus just the originals so
i really love these web applications
it's like a
dashboard on steroids with the back end
of python which lets you do so many more
cool things so that is what dash is now
recently dash came out with a new
feature called pages which basically
allows you to create a dash app that has
multiple pages so it's basically a
full-on website so you can create an
entire website an entire web application
just using python and dash which is
really awesome this is a brand new
feature that makes it so much easier to
create these awesome data science tools
that you can like
produce and make awesome things with
them so that's we're going to be testing
out today and so i got coding i had
these ideas and these questions that i
wanted to explore kind of looking at you
know how much time an animal is spending
in the shelter you know what type of
animals spend there longer what day of
the week and what time and what day of
the year is the shelter the most busy
and of course i wanted like a home page
that kind of summarized the entire
project and the entire operations of the
animal shelter so those are the main
questions i had in the back of my mind
while i was creating this dash
application so i figured i'm going to
have a home page that's going to have
the main ideas i'll have a schedule
calendar page that'll kind of cover the
idea of the when stuff happens and i'll
have a third page that talks about how
much time the animals spend in this
shelter so the three-page dash
application
that will give a good start to you know
a this animal shelter to actually know
what's going on now before i show you
the full end results i just want to show
you the actual code so the really
compiles of four actual scripts the
first one is the app that actually
launches the app and then tells the
computer you know how to deploy this app
and it is 40 lines of code then i have
my home page which ended up being around
150 lines of code the calendar page
which ended up being around 115 lines of
code and then the time and shelter page
which ends up being around 50 lines of
code and overall it took me about five
hours to write all this code and make
sure that i followed everything the way
it was supposed to be but it took me
three hours to deploy it it was very
hard to deploy to heroku
that's what i ended up using to deploy
this so that you could actually just
type in a url into any computer so you
can check this out you can type in this
url and it would take you to that page
so you can see after 8 hours 10 minutes
and eight seconds i was able to finish
this project and i was ready to show
adam all right adam i
have taken your challenge and i have
completed it are you ready to see some
of the results i am ready let's see it
so i went to animal dash shelter dash
avery.heroku app.com which all of you
guys can go and check out right now and
showed adam my austin animal shelter app
and this is my homepage this is where we
have like basically the lowdown of
everything important so 49 animals are
left at the center each day they spend
on average almost 17 days in the shelter
and only 42 percent of them get adopted
you can see the rest of the outcomes
right here you can see the animals they
receive which is almost 60 percent dogs
so over half of them are dogs and pretty
much the rest are cats at the end we can
also see what age the animals are
retrieved and how long they spend in the
shelter then of course i give you a
little information about the animal
shelter and this is of course made with
with plotly so that is the home page but
if you remember we wanted to talk about
also how long the different animals
spend in the shelter so if we go up here
we can switch to different pages and go
to the time in shelter page this graph
does take a little bit to load because
it is quite a bit of data but this graph
is is basically strip plots and violin
plots which you don't have time to go
into today but basically allows you to
see
you know the different key points so for
instance if you hover over the violin
plot over here it'll show you that the
median dog spends five days in the
shelter the minimum is zero and the
upper max is a thousand six hundred days
in the shelter which is a lot this this
means that dogs spend on average about
five days
cats spend on average 5.8 days the other
animals spend on average 0.35 days so
much lower and birds only spend let's
see 3.9 days i think i read this one
wrong let's just double check no i read
that right okay so others get out of
there pretty quickly
but it lets you see different animal
types you can also maybe look at okay
let's look at the you know gender the
sex
you know maybe girl cats get out there
faster than boycats or something like
that and what that allows you to do is
it'll remake this graph once again takes
a little bit but you can check out the
neutered males the median time spent in
the shelter is 4.85 days
and the spade is 4.9
the intact male is 5.9 and the intact
female is 5.4 so at least the means are
higher for for those that are intact and
not spayed and neutered so there's a
couple different categories i won't let
you i won't go through all of them right
now but you can go ahead and go to this
website and check out and play around
with this i also made this calendar page
which lets you see
when the intakes happen so in the summer
there's actually a lot of intakes this
is what i found in july there's a ton of
intakes each year which basically means
people are dropping off the animals that
they either find or the pets that they
couldn't handle or something like that
in this summer and in the winter there's
not necessarily as much of that now we
can go ahead and turn this toggle and we
see that a lot of pets are adopted in
july that was july that was july that
was july or august i guess july right
here so there's something happening in
that those summer months where maybe
there's a campaign or or maybe there's
some sort of like deadline where they're
like there's different transfers
happening i'm not entirely sure this
would be interesting to present to the
the you know the organizers and the
employees of this place to try to
understand does this make sense does
this data go along with what you guys do
and we can also do this for instead of
doing it for like the whole entire
timeline we can turn this toggle right
here and we have the day of the week and
the hour of the day we have this heat
map so we can see a lot of drop-offs or
sorry a lot of pickups happen at 15
hours that's basically 5 p.m
a lot of pickups are happening and
that's that's what this yellow signifies
in the middle of the night there's not
nearly as many and we can change this
back to the income so this is people
dropping off their pets we see there's
actually a lot at 11. so that's probably
when the shelter opens so people drop
off their pets you know at 11 and people
end up picking up their pets at 5 p.m so
maybe there's some sort of management
maybe we have more people working in the
morning versus the afternoon there's
something that we can decide in terms of
shelter in here and i hope this is
useful for the shelter and for you know
you guys to get an idea of what the
shelter can do here's adam's thoughts on
this app no i really like this this is i
like how you divide it into separate
pages because you don't want to put so
many drafts on one page it doesn't make
sense it's too much you don't want the
user to keep on scrolling and scrolling
so good use of pages and this is very
very useful information again if i was
if i was managing or an employee at the
at
the shelter this would really help me
understand like you said went to staff
went to have fewer staff when do i need
more more room for the cats and dogs
that are coming in holidays in the
winter obviously there's fewer coming in
so maybe they can dedicate more more
staff to cleaning or whatever this i can
see this can be helpful to other
shelters around the country so adam did
really like it but i don't think it's
perfect there's a lot of things that i
could have done better that i would have
done if i had more time and i want you
guys to be able to do those things so
there is a link in the description down
below that will sign you up to get all
of the resources for this project and
for the future projects as well so make
sure you go ahead and click on that list
and i'll give you a little example of
what i would do differently if i was you
and i could just fork what i've done and
edit it and create a little bit
differently so basically what i would
change about this is i would try to make
it more outcome dependent so for example
like we saw that this dog right here was
it looks like it was about i don't know
seven years old when it was adopted and
it spent
a thousand six hundred days in the
shelter
and i think if you do the math that's
about three four five years in the
shelter so it was adopted or died after
12 years
did i get adopted after five years in
the shelter that is crazy so i'd like to
maybe put that in the like the hover
over here or just try to understand that
a little bit more the other thing i'd
probably do is something similar on the
time in the shelter over here is i would
try to make these outcomes also based
off of what actually happened because
you know if someone was in the shelter
this many days and then died that makes
sense but if they were adopted that is
crazy maybe i don't know maybe that's
not crazy i don't know but like i would
try to understand this a little bit more
and try to make it a little bit more
focused on the outcome another thing
that i could do is you could make a
machine learning algorithm that would
try to predict you know how long an
animal might stay in the shelter like
for instance it'd be really cool to have
a random forest or decision tree showing
like what parts of the animal like
whether it's a cat or dog how old they
are what color they are what breed they
are all that good stuff how long they
might stay in the animal shelter that
would be a really cool machine learning
application that any of you guys could
try out i'll also put more like
opportunities and things that you could
take this further inside of the
resources section so make sure you click
that link down below make sure that you
click that you're subscribed to the
channel so you see future videos you can
click this playlist to watch the former
videos and part of this challenge and
guys i'm exhausted that took me like
eight hours to just build not even
including the youtube video so i cannot
believe that i'm gonna wake up tomorrow
and do this again wish me good luck see
you guys tomorrow

Title: Overrated OR Underrated with Data Scientist Ken Jee - Excel, Python, Data Engineering, & More!

Description: What does data scientist  @Ken Jee   think about Microsoft Excel, Data Science, Python, and Data Engineering? Watch to find out üëÜ

‚≠ê If you find this video fun, consider subscribing for more data content: www.youtube.com/channel/UCuyfszBAd3gUt9vAbC1dfqA/?sub_confirmation=1

Watch Ken's Main Channel:   @KenJee_ds
Watch Ken's Podcast:  @KNNPodcast 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

Video Transcript:
[Music]
my name is Kenji so I'm the head of data
science at Scouts Consulting Group I
also make a lot of content on the
internet whether it is YouTube whether
it is podcast
I'm there
I think Microsoft Excel is it depends
who the audience is I think for data
scientists it's a little bit underrated
right it's still a tool that is used to
communicate with a lot of business
people and it can be effective I think
for the complete opposite side of the
equation for for business people or
whatever it might be it's a little bit
overrated so both yeah
oh man it depends on what what genre
again right I I like Elon Musk I read
his biography I think he's a fascinating
guy
I think you know I think he's properly
rated like you know I don't how do
people even rate him people either hate
him or love them polarization that's
true so that's probably how it should be
I personally think they're overrated I I
wouldn't personally work there it's not
really my cup of tea I crave a lot more
autonomy although I do
quite I would quite enjoy a lot of the
salaries that I'm seeing so both yeah
but I would say for me again I believe
they're a little bit overrated
especially with how hard you have to
work to get into them
and a lot of the things that in some
sense you have to give up when you join
them
I'd say
about properly rated I think there's a
lot of benefits of the iPhone in terms
of privacy and there's a lot of control
that you have on that device relative to
other devices where you can choose what
apps talk to each other and whatnot but
I also have felt like the iPhones have
been on decline ever since Steve Jobs
died
super overrated it's very confusing term
and it encompasses a lot of things I
agree
I think data engineering is underrated I
think actually I think it's like way
underrated I mean if you think about it
from a company like a corporate
perspective you have to have
high quality data to do high quality
analysis in my personal opinion so if
you're not building that out first
you're going to be in a lot of trouble
and a lot of companies are like oh you
can do the sexy stuff with AI but they
haven't done the prerequisite data
engineering and they get really stopped
in their tracks
accurately rated I had to we had some
awesome ones yesterday Cinco de Mayo two
days ago
two days ago we didn't even have tacos
on Cinco de Mayo I know I'm brutal in
Texas too
oh
so I think it's
it's a little bit overrated right and it
depends it's from my personal view so as
a as a content creator I don't think
that there are a lot of options or it's
optimize for people that have an
audience very well especially the
messaging I cannot keep up with the
messaging to save my life it is a huge
pain it's tough yeah for for most people
though I think it's really useful I
think it's a great way to connect with
people a great way to to grow your brand
a great way to to find Opportunities
um but there's
yeah for Content creators a huge number
of Alternatives that will generally
serve better
oh YouTube way underrated come on way
completely self-serving okay that's fine
absolutely I mean there's so many
um high quality content creators out
there that you know if I started making
content now with one of my videos were
when I started I would get zero views
right the quality of content and the
quality of information is so high
because there are more people in the
space trying to make a name for
themselves it does make it a little
harder for me to differentiate and just
helpful stories but I also think it's
really good for for everyone and in
general like we wouldn't be able to have
a bunch of content creators here if it
wasn't for for YouTube and for LinkedIn
for any of these platforms
um the Chicago Bears are always way
overrated
regular Bears regular Bears very smart
animals you see them them looking at
like on the side great data scientists
yeah oh yeah they like there's one where
like you there's someone waves at the
bear and the bear was back yeah
um and they know how to catch salmon
real well I love fishing and so I kind
of aspire to be like a bear in that
sense
I'd say it's properly rated I think it's
a great language for almost everyone to
get started with I think it is very
flexible for a lot of use cases and
I use it most of the time so it's
probably hypocritical if I if I uh I
thought it was too overrated but yeah I
mean I see the language evolving and
continuing to evolve in a positive way
so
I think it's you know and a lot of
people love it so
there you go that was overrated
undergraded with Kenji last one Kenji
overrated underrated properly rated way
overrated
all right thanks for coming on
laughs
what a loser that's good thank you
[Music]

Title: Living With Famous Data Scientists For 72 Hours

Description: What happens when you get 10+ data science content creators all in one place? üëÄ

‚≠ê If you find this video entertaining, and want to see more data content, hit the subscribe button!

00:00 - Introduction & Travel
01:21 - Day 2 in Austin
02:14 - Who Was There? 
06:13 - Day 3 in Austin
08:10 - Day 4 in Austin
8:42 - What I Learned From Famous Data Scientists

Subscribe To All The Famous Data Scientists üëá
@KenJee_ds 
@LukeBarousse 
@NickWan 
@ShashankData 
@Miki_ML 
@SeattleDataGuy 
@CodeEmporium 
@TinaHuang1 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#DataScientist #DataScience #dataanalytics

Video Transcript:
so a couple weeks ago i got a message
from my good friend ken g asking if i
wanted to attend a data content creator
meetup in austin texas and i gave him an
immediate yes i was so excited and in
this video i'm going to give you a
behind-the-scenes pass to this trip how
i felt what we did and get to know a
little bit of the other content creators
so ready here we go so the trip started
off with me waking up at 5 30 a.m so i
could be at the salt lake international
airport by 6 30 a.m for my 7 50 flight
say goodbye to my wife haley and went
inside the airport then i got a sad text
message saying my first flight was
delayed by three hours so i walked to
the airport grabbed a bite to eat sat
down and got some work done the semester
just ended for my mit data certificate
students so i was working on grading
their last assignments as well as
working on some content about data
science projects for my own course then
i hopped on my first plane which was
salt lake city to lax after landing had
some more time to get a little bit more
work done grabbed some panda express and
i was super excited to see my fortune
cookie but i had no fortune so i was
super sad then i hopped on the next
plane which went from lax to austin and
i'm finally here in austin
i'm at this house
i hope it's the right house otherwise
it's gonna be really awkward if i'm just
going up to the wrong house it was the
right house but my phone died so
unfortunately i didn't really do any
vlogging that night good morning it is
the morning of day two this is the house
we're staying at and i have to catch you
up on a lot of stuff got to the front
door and everyone was having dinner we
had steaks last night got to meet
everyone for the first time in person
and it was super fun everyone was super
kind kind of just chilled had a good
time listened to some music played some
games stuff like that a lot of fun woke
up this morning and i just got to work
cleaned up a little bit and uh now ken
and luke are shooting a video and i'm
going for a run and while i go on that
run i thought it would be a good time to
introduce you to everyone who is at this
event so first up is ken g but before i
explain who ken is and honestly you
don't need that explanation you already
know who he is i wanted to say that i
did have the opportunity to shoot some
awesome clips with nearly every single
one of the content creators at the house
and i'll be posting those videos on my
youtube channel very soon over the next
few weeks so if you aren't already
subscribed now would be a great time to
do so to make sure you don't miss out on
this awesome content that's coming your
way so kenji was there as well he does a
myriad of different things but you
probably know him best from his amazing
data science youtube channel and his
podcast ken's nearest neighbors and
ken's exactly the same guy you see
behind the camera except he's a little
bit funnier in real life to be honest
and he actually crossed the 200k
subscriber mark on youtube while we were
in austin so that was really fun to
celebrate that with him next up was luke
bruce and you've probably seen his
youtube channel all about data analytics
luke is one of the most down-to-earth
people i've ever met seriously he's just
the most southern charm guy and he has
an amazing story about living on a
submarine and becoming a data analyst i
love meeting him and i can't wait to do
more with him in the future hopefully we
can collaborate a little bit next up is
nick wan and nick is known for his
amazing twitch streams they're so fun
and crazy he does over three amazing
hours of just streaming all about data
science content and the data world and
honestly you just kind of have to
experience this so definitely check out
his twitch channel i also love his short
clips on his youtube channel where he
discusses the stuff that happens in his
twitch streams and it's really good i
had a fun time being on nick's stream
right here in this video although his
chat does scare me a little bit they're
a lot of fun of course shashank was
there you've probably seen his youtube
channel before where he covers the life
as a data analyst and all things data
analytics and shashank is honestly one
of the friendliest and most
knowledgeable people i've ever met in
the data world i mean seriously the dude
knew so much about history and facts and
data definitely a good person to
subscribe to and to learn from makiko
was also there and you may have not seen
her youtube before and that's because
well she just started it but it's going
to be great she has an amazing data
transition story by taking a bootcamp
and is extremely knowledgeable in all
things machine learning ops which is
pretty much the hottest topic in data
science right now and will be the focus
of her youtube channel she's awesome
she's kind so let's go ahead help her
out learn from her give her a subscribe
on her channel and be amazed by her
machine learning ops knowledge next was
a jay you may have not heard of his name
before but you've probably seen his
youtube channel and that's because he's
better known as code emporium on youtube
now aj is extremely concise has
extremely great technical videos all
about data science machine learning that
type of stuff you should check them out
for sure and on top of that he has a
keen sense of fashion a great dancer and
even works at one of the coolest sneaker
sales companies in the world hunter kemp
was also there he's an ambassador for z
by hp and he focuses on analytics in
cyber security he was super nice and
super smart as well definitely want to
check him out next was seattle data guy
he no longer lives in seattle his real
name is ben rogezon and my takeaway from
ben is hard work the dude is not only a
genius but super hard working he's
running his own data engineering
consulting business now and just
straight killing it he also has an
awesome data engineering channel that
you should check out on youtube and be
sure to subscribe because it has so much
good stuff next was ian greengross he's
actually a sports lawyer who has
recently teamed up with the data science
youtube community to help contract
sponsor deals and he's been learning
python and data science as well which is
really awesome he was really nice guy
and really funny and honestly kind of
felt like my uncle it was awesome and
last but not least is tina huang i
didn't get any great footage with tina
but tina's so awesome she has an amazing
youtube channel with over 300 000
subscribers covering data science and
productivity and they're honestly super
action-packed with great insight and
awesome information that you can
actually do something with tina is
seriously just so quiet and so nice and
so easy to get along with i loved
getting to meet her in person the rest
of day two was pretty much spent sitting
around this giant counter in the kitchen
and doing work together hanging out
chatting giving each other content ideas
and taking turns shooting videos
together so kind of doing collabs which
was a lot of fun since we were in texas
we got some of that good texas barbecue
went to a cool bar and watched some
pickleball and enjoyed the austin night
lights all right it is day three it's
been really fun you know before coming i
i'll be honest i was a little bit
nervous i was a little bit intimidated
by everyone everyone here is so smart
has so many followers and so i was a
little bit nervous a little bit nervous
to come in all honesty everyone's been
so welcoming and so nice and i've been
able to make some really cool videos and
get to know a lot of these content
creators in a better way and so it's
been really fun and i'm super glad i
came so i went for a run in downtown
austin just to enjoy how beautiful
austin was and when i got home i thought
i'd take a look at seeing what everyone
was doing to give you an insight to what
these creators do all day i came home
from my run and asked everyone what they
were doing and this is what hunter was
doing he was generating poems poems
home generators
very artsy luke was being really
responsible and cleaning the dishes and
putting them away thanks luke kenji was
actually making breakfast sandwiches and
guys they are so good ken is actually a
really good cook they were delicious are
you asking me or the video
oh yeah i'll take one mickey working on
her fashion projects she is really smart
when it comes to all things fashion and
clothing i don't understand a whole lot
about it but it was really cool to watch
her do her thing all right code emporium
what are you doing right now oh i'm just
looking at myself trying to try to see
how i look and compared to steve jobs
with my skull
turtleneck
what are you doing right now i'm uh
setting up for a video where i talk
about chapter two of storytelling and
data all right sale data guy what are
you doing right now
um reading comments and eating
uh kimchi egg and rice we did a live
stream to celebrate ken crossing 200 000
subscribers and it was an amazing live
stream one of my favorite parts and then
shashank spilled something at the end it
was pretty fun
later that day we had a great night at a
korean barbecue place at delicious food
i mean just listen to this
the coolest part is they actually had
robot waiters that brought you your food
and i thought that was just insane i'd
never seen that before then we headed
home and called it a night it's been fun
it's been awesome it's really been like
so fun to like get to know everyone and
see like their in life personalities
although most of their in life
personalities are pretty much exactly
who they are online as i said earlier in
the video i was actually pretty nervous
and pretty scared uh to come to this
event but i'm super glad that i did
because it's been really fun everyone's
been super nice and i feel like i've
learned a lot and gotten a lot out of
the uh out of the experience so sadly
this was the last day so we said our
goodbyes hopped in an uber and headed to
the austin airport to catch our
individual flights to where we live so
what did i learn from this experience
well one i really love the data science
community it's so fun to be a part of
it's fun to participate it's fun to
create content it's fun to consume
content and i loved meeting these other
data science content creators they were
so nice and so smart and so inclusive it
was just a lot of fun second thing i
think i took away from this trip is to
do things that scare you i was nervous
to go to this i almost like was in the
car i was like i don't want to go to
this but i'm so glad that i did because
i think i've made some friends that
hopefully will last a long time and i
also learned a heck of a lot from it and
i don't regret it at all so do things
that scare you and the third takeaway is
youtube is awesome and i've been
underwriting it for a long time i'm
gonna try to give a lot more to this
channel because i really like the
platform it's an amazing platform and i
hope that i can give a little bit back
to what i've gotten from the platform so
i'm gonna take youtube a lot more
serious so guys if you enjoyed this
video please hit subscribe i have videos
coming out with all these content
creators that i want to share with you
and i don't want you to miss it thank
you so much for watching and i'll see
you in the future video

Title: Programming Rock, Paper, Scissors in Python (Basics of Python)

Description: Learn how to program rock, paper, scissors in Python! In this video, I'll introduce you to some basics of Python programming and we'll build a game of rock, paper, scissors that you can play against the computer.

This is a great introductory to Python for new beginners. 

This is actually what I covered in Week 1's Office Hours of MIT's Professional Data Engineering Certificate program that I help teach.

‚≠ê If you find this video helpful, it would mean the world if you subscribed! I'm trying to get to 2,000 subscribers. 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#Python #Programming #Data

Video Transcript:
hey guys in this video i'm going to be
teaching you python basics by teaching
you how to write rock paper scissors in
python it's going to be really fun so
let's get into it
the first step to coding in python is
getting access to python now you can
download it onto your local machine but
i've actually found it a lot less
friction and way easier to just use
something like deepnote.com to have
online notebooks where you can already
have python installed and that way it's
no friction no problem for you so that's
where i'll start is by going to
deepnode.com setting up for an account
and then creating a new project that'll
open a new notebook that already has
python installed and it's ready to roll
for your coding the first thing you'll
notice is that there's already something
here it starts with a hashtag hashtag is
equal to a comment inside of python this
means it's written language for humans
computers don't read this before we
actually get into any coding let's first
map out how to play rock paper scissors
just using pseudocode pseudocode
basically means we're going to humanly
write down what the steps of the code
might be using comments so first we need
to get the user's choice of rock papers
and scissors then we need to get the
computer's choice of rock papers and
scissors correct once those two things
are decided then we can go into the
logic of the game and that'll be if the
user played rock and the computer played
paper who wins the last thing is to send
a message about who won and what the
result is and that is our pseudo code
for this game now the first part of our
studio code is to do the user's choice
in order to get the user's choice we're
going to give the user the option okay
so in order to do that we're going to
use a function called input this is
built into python natively and the input
allows a message to be sent to the user
and returns the user a chance to use
their keyboard and we'll save that value
so for instance input
rock
paper or scissors
and we'll put a question mark right here
a space and then we'll go ahead and hit
enter you'll notice that down here it
runs rock papers and scissors and then
gives the user the option to type
something in you can type in rock and
hit enter and that value will be
returned okay we don't want to return
the value to return a value basically
means the computer just output it we
want to be saved we want to be saved as
a variable in order to create a variable
you just set something equal to what you
just did so use the equal sign and
create whatever name of variable you
would like in this particular case i'm
going to make it called user underscore
choice you cannot have spaces in your
variable names and so you can use
underscores in this particular case i'm
going to have user choice be
representative of whatever the user
inputs in this little text box right
here and they can type in bananas if
they want and then if we were to go down
here and type in user underscore choice
i'm using shift enter to run this by the
way you can also run it by clicking
right here it'll print out bananas and
that's because the user choice is now
represented by bananas so we've
successfully saved the user's choice as
the variable user choice now let's go
ahead and create the computer choice
i'll store that in a variable called
computer underscore choice now what am i
going to set it equal to well we'll come
back to this here in a minute but let's
go ahead and just set it to a default
because you know we can't read a
computer's mind but let's just go ahead
and assume every time the computer plays
the computer will choose the variable
rock okay so it's just going to be set
up to always choose rock so see how i
put rock inside of those single quotes
python has different data types and this
particular one is called a string a
string is basically just characters or
text and it's in comparison to things
like numbers right and so if we actually
use the built-in python function type
open parenthesis we can pass in any sort
of thing in here and it'll tell us what
the data type is so i can type in for
instance the user choice right since we
typed it in it's a character and if i
hit shift enter run it you'll see it
returns str that stands for string and
basically that's just a text or
character field versus if i type in for
instance type of one right this is just
a the number one it'll say that it's an
int which stands for integer which means
a numeric value with no decimals if i
type in 1.567
this now becomes a
float which is basically a numerical
value with decimals so that's a quick
introduction to python data types very
quickly now we're going to be moving to
the logic of the actual game if you've
never played rock paper scissors it's a
pretty simple game basically you choose
rock paper scissors and someone else
chooses rock paper scissors and there's
a set logic of who wins in certain
situations so here are the options okay
that you play rock
and the computer also plays rock okay
that is one option what happens if you
play rock and they play paper okay
here's another option you play rock and
they play scissors okay
if that if this was to occur this would
be a tie okay
if rock and paper were to be that would
be a win for paper so that's a lose for
us okay
then we're going to play rock and they
play scissors that's a win for us all
right let's keep moving on to this
section i'm just doing more pseudo code
a little bit more detailed what happens
if i put paper well if they put rock
then we win right because paper beats
rock so we're going to call that a win
what if we play paper and they play
paper that's going to be a tie okay
and what happens if we play paper and
they play scissors well in that case we
lose okay
and then lastly what happens if we play
the scissors okay and they play rock
that would be a lose for us
if we play scissors
and they play paper that is a win for us
and if they play
scissors if we play scissors and they
also play scissors that would be a tie
and so this type of logic is actually
going to be built using an if statement
in python you know if this then that we
have lots of different ifs okay so we're
going to go ahead and create those in
python using if statements and elif
statements so if we want to have an if
statement we just start off by using the
word if okay and we have this word if
we're going to be comparing two things
okay so if the user choice
okay if we played rock and you do that
by typing double equal signs that means
is this equal double equal signs means
is this equal so if user choice is equal
to
rock okay
and we're gonna put that into
parentheses just to put another extra
thing here use the and sign
and the computer choice
okay
the computer choice is equal to in this
case rock right then what happens you're
gonna put a colon at the end to show
that you're done with that particular if
statement hit enter
that'll auto indent so basically indent
means four spaces or whatever right a
tab
and it'll auto end it and this is your
then you don't have to type in then it's
already implied so if i played rock and
computer chose rock then it's a tie and
so we're going to print that out so
we're going to use the print statement
which basically sends a message to a
human and say it'll say it is a tie
okay
and so we can actually already pretty
much play this game
in one particular case so if we go ahead
and hit the run button up here hit run
it's going to run through all of this
code it's going to ask us at the bottom
what we want to play and if we choose to
play rock so type in rock
and we know that the computer is going
to choose rock right because that's
automatic right there in line five
so type in rock hit enter it'll print
out it's a tie
okay great so we know that we've already
hit this if statement it was true
then print this so we'll just continue
doing this for the rest of the logic
it'll take us a little bit to complete
but it'll be well worth it in the end
now maybe instead of printing it is a
tie on all of the ties what we could do
right here is create a tie message
so this is going to be the variable that
contains it is a tie exclamation mark
and instead of printing out the actual
string right here i can print out the
variable that represents it okay
so moving on to the next one we're going
to go ahead and move what happens if i
the user so user choice
equals in this case i'm still playing
rock okay but this time the computer has
chosen another one now of course this
situation hasn't happened quite yet but
we'll get to it later so computer choice
is equal to paper okay
then we're going to print what well
looks like we need to print
we need to go right underneath it print
and it's going to be a loss so let's
create a loss message okay so we'll call
it a
loss
message
and we'll set it equal to
you lost
okay
and we'll go ahead and pass that in to
the print statement right here one thing
does change here though so if this is
true then print this but what if it's
not you can go ahead and continue on to
this one if we call this an l if and
lift stands for else if so if this is
true then do this
if not check if this is true if it is
true then do this and we'll keep doing
that throughout the page so let's go
ahead and copy this and move it down
here where we'll be saying okay i'm a
rock and the computer is a scissor so
type in scissor here and what happens
well we need a win message so we'll type
in win
message
and say
you won
okay go ahead and type in that copy that
win message paste it down here
and now we'll keep moving on so copy
this
move it down here in this case it is a
paper
and a rock
and in that case we win so we'll leave
the win message
copy this
move it down
okay in this case i played paper and the
computer chose rock oh the computer
chose paper sorry about that
in that case it's a tie so we'll put in
the tie message see how much easier this
is now that we have that pseudo code
okay keep going so we have paper and a
scissors and in that case it's a loss
right so we'll put in the
loss
oops double select
loss message
okay next we have the scissors and the
rock
so we'll type in scissors right here
scissors
in this case it's a rock
and it's a loss so we'll leave the lost
message
copy it
paste it back down in this case scissors
and paper and it's a win
so we'll use the
win message
so type in win
message and then lastly this is the last
one of
scissors scissors and it's a tie okay
so let's go ahead and put time message
all right
and then lastly who won well we're
actually indicating all throughout here
so we can actually probably delete this
part of the pseudocode because we're
already doing it so that's great now
there's one big issue with our game and
that is that the computer choice is
always going to be rock and so none of
these other choices will none of this
will be true none of these if statements
will be true unless the computer choice
is equal to rock so we won't be printing
anything else so what we're going to go
ahead and do right now is type in an
else statement at the bottom okay an
else statement at the bottom is
basically going to say if all of this is
false then do this
and then say print
there was an error in the game okay i'm
going to go ahead and hit shift enter to
run that cell i'm going to try playing
i'm going to choose rock the computer's
also going to be choosing rock so i
already know the outcome is either an
air or a tie
hit enter and it was a tie
great let's run it again i'll go up here
press this arrow
that'll go ahead and run it
it'll have me choose i will choose paper
okay so i know that i either win or it's
an error hit shift enter let's see what
we get
oh hit regular ender there we go
[Music]
and i won okay so this is fun but not
really because i always know what the
computer is going to play so we want to
make that different we want to make it
random right and so instead of having
the computer's choice always be rock
what i'm going to do is actually create
options for the computer to choose from
i'm going to do that by creating a list
and a list is just square brackets okay
square brackets and you can pass in
whatever you want inside of that list
i wanted to have three options inside
that list i wanted to be rock notice
that i'm making them strings so they're
in single quotes paper
okay
or the scissors
and they're also comma separated so that
list will now have three options okay
and i'm going to go ahead and call it
options list
set it equal to that and so now we've
created this new list okay and instead
of the computer choice being just the
rock what i'm going to do is import a
library and we're not going to get into
this too much detail but python has
extra add-ons basically that are called
libraries or packages that enhance the
ability of python this particular
package that i want to add on is
actually called random and it's going to
help me make a random choice so in order
to get that added onto python what i'm
going to do is use the import command
the import command basically says add
this on so and on the random package
okay now that that will be added on
i can go ahead and instead of having a
rock be the computer choice every time i
can use the function random
inside of random dot
choice what that's going to do
is make a random choice from a list so
i'll open parentheses to pass in a value
i'm going to pass in my options list so
instead of being just rock it's going to
choose either rock paper or scissors
randomly every time we play the game and
with that we should pretty much be ready
to play so i'm going to go ahead and
click the run button right here to run
this cell
i'm going to scroll down to where it's
asking me rock papers or scissors i'm
going to type in rock i'm going to hit
enter
and it ran let's see what happened it
says i lost well that's not very fun
because i can't see what i even put and
what the computer put and so maybe we
need to add one little section right
here and just have it be like a
reporting section okay so pseudocode
report i'm going to say print
i chose okay and then i'm going to pass
in the value of what i chose and so that
is going to be user choice okay so if i
have user choice right here it'll print
out i chose user choice if we add this
plus right here so it's going to take
user choice and add it to the end of
this sentence or the string and say what
i chose okay
then i'm going to do the same thing for
what the computer chose
computer
chose and then also pass in the plus
sign which is going to add to that
string and then what did the computer
choose well it's of course the computer
choice
because that's what we
substituted here and that's what is
represented as so i chose computer chose
and then maybe we'll also just add a
print here that will basically be a
bunch of dashes to just make it look a
little bit easier and have some space
between if i won or lost
go ahead and hit the run button scroll
down
uh what are we feeling maybe paper right
now hit enter
so let's see what happened ready
i chose paper computer chose rock so i
won
but we're not quite done because what
happens if i play again
and i type in
apple
okay
what happens then
okay there was an error in the game but
maybe we'll give them a little bit more
clear of a direction here
check to see if you spelt
the words correctly
and had the proper
[Music]
casing okay just in case like someone
types in like for instance let's go back
and let's just have a paper lower case
it's going to be an error so that way
we're going to tell people what to do if
there is a mistake okay that way they
can play again honestly how cool is this
that i've made a game in python in like
less than 20 minutes where i can choose
paper the computer chose paper and it's
a tie i could be playing this for days
to be honest all right paper again
i lost oh my gosh what the heck so there
you have it there's a little
introduction to python by programming
rock paper scissors how fun was that not
too bad right if you have any questions
about it let me know down in the
comments down below if you like this
video please let youtube know by
pressing the like button and it would
mean a lot to me if you hit subscribe
i'll try to make more videos like this
in the future i'm trying to get to 2 000
subscribers so if you could help me in
that journey i'd appreciate it alright
bye everyone
you

Title: NFT Data Science Project | Network Analysis

Description: In this video, I dive into creating a data science project for your portfolio using NFT data. NFT stands for non-fungible token and took the tech world by storm last year. In this project, we will use Kaggle to download a data set, use Python to execute SQL queries to create a network visualization.

Moonstream NFT Data Set on Kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/code/simiotic/ethereum-nft-analysis

Code for this video: https://github.com/AveryData/NFT-Network-Analytics

Shout out to @TinaHuang1  for the collab.




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#DataScience #Analytics #DataAnalytics

Video Transcript:
what's up you guys in this video i'm
going to be giving you a tutorial on how
to do a data science project on honestly
one of the hottest buzzwords in the
entire world
yes nfts now if you've been hiding under
a rock the past year nft stands for
non-fungible token and basically they
are digital assets stored on the
blockchain and over 22 billion was spent
last year on purchasing nfts alone which
if you don't know that is a lot of money
and in this world in the nft world
there's all sorts of scams pump and
dumps and rag to riches stories back to
rags again sometimes it's kind of a
crazy world to be a part of for instance
this penguin collection started around
0.1 eth which is about 300
and rose to an average price of five eth
which is about fifteen twenty thousand
dollars only to have the value drop back
down to one eat or three thousand
dollars so crazy ride crazy project and
regardless of if you think nfts are all
scams or if you think they're bad for
the environment or you love them one
thing is really obvious and that is
there is a lot of money to be made and
where there is money to be made data can
help us make it so i set off on a
journey to make as much money as i
possibly could by flipping nfts
according to a machine learning
algorithm
and the result one eternity later well i
uh that's i that's that's what i want i
wanted to do but it turns out it's a
little bit harder than
you might think so instead i just made a
data science project i could put on my
data science portfolio and i decided i'd
love to share that with you so that's
we're going to talk about instead so
here is the business use case nfts are
just collectible digital assets whose
price is pretty much based off of
speculation and who might pay more for
this in the future but they're also kind
of like memberships and they're like
getting into a certain club and stuff
like that as well that's to go to say
that these clubs are all about the term
community which basically just means
they help each other out and give each
other alpha which alpha is hot tips
basically in the nft world you're
basically like oh this project might
take off or you should check out this
project or like do this with your
cryptocurrency yo stuff like that and
really projects take off because someone
starts to pay a higher price than the
current market is offering so others
raise their price because they realize
they can make more money which makes the
whole project raise and look like it's
actually gaining momentum which causes
even more people to come and buy which
causes even more of an increase in the
price and basically that just goes on
and on and the circle goes on until you
have a really big expensive project you
get the picture so the rise of projects
is very communal and vary based upon
groups of individuals with lots of money
who see an opportunity to make more
money these individuals are really
important that's going to be a big part
of our analysis so i decided to see if
there is a way i could identify some of
these individuals with lots and lots and
lots of money by the way they're
referred to as whales by the nft
community because they're big right and
see what they were holding to see if any
of those projects were currently cheap
but might take off in the future and
help me retire before the young age of
27. so to do that we needed data and
let's go see it now you'd think that nft
data would be pretty easy to get right
because it's like all recorded on the
blockchain and
yeah the blockchain's so cool wrong it's
so hard to get it's actually super hard
and if you guys want me to make a video
highlighting all of the ways to get nft
data that i know however let me know
down in the comments down below one of
the most complete nft data sets was
created by a small company called
moonstream shout out moonstream where
they scraped over 7 million nft
transactions on the blockchain and
stored it in a sql lite database and
i've posted it up on kaggle and i'll
have the link to that data set in the
description down below this data set is
a bit outdated now but it's one of the
richest and easiest to get in terms of
nft data sets so it works for our
business use case once i installed it
time to whip out that handy dandy python
and get coding you'll be able to get
everything that i coded by scrolling
down seeing that subscribe button and
hitting it as hard as you can and then
finding the link to the github repo down
below in the description but make sure
you hit the subscribe button because i
uh
i wrote a script
that won't let you access my github
without being a subscriber
to the code here we are inside of the
code i'm inside of spyder and i'll be
programming in python so the first thing
we need to do is make sure that we have
the sqlite database i'm choosing the
nfts one
from the kaggle that we talked about
previously so you can see that i have
that downloaded right there inside of my
file explorer next we want to connect to
that we use sql 3 so i need to import
that
and connect to the sql light and start a
cursor once i'm starting the cursor i
use pandas read sql query so i need to
import pandas and i'm going to start
reading different parts of the database
just so i can make sure that i
understand it so what i start with is
getting a list of the five biggest
projects and sorting by the
total volume after grouping by the nft
address
hello test it okay
note that i did have to join the
transfers and the nft table here and i
did have to take the transaction and
divide it by this big number for some
reason it stored
huge numbers on
terms of the blockchain that first data
frame will give us the top five we have
arcbots art blocks board ape yacht club
mute and ape yacht club me bits and loot
and here is how much volume they've done
and the nft contract
so after i found the top five i created
a little dictionary that would basically
get you from the address to the name
scroll down here also made a tuple
with some of the contracts as well
this is getting a list of all the nft
projects we can go to all project names
see what that looks like this is quite
big but here's all the different options
there's the dogepound there's characters
there's there's so many i think there's
7000 or something like 9000 different
ones
chinese ones looks like nft play stuff
like that so that was just for fun
made a dictionary to map all of them
just in case i needed it
now what i did next was take a look at
the
um the kind of the the distinct amount
of nft projects
that and the owner from from the current
owners this is another table that has
all the current owners where nft address
is in the contracts and as a reminder
contracts is the top five so basically i
am looking at the the top three people
that own all of these projects or own a
good chunk of these projects creeping by
the owner and the number of projects so
let me show you what that looks like top
n
let's go here top
and owners list
basically this particular wallet owner
this particular wallet owner and this
particular wallet owner own five out of
the five top projects so these people
are probably pretty rich because those
are pretty expensive projects
and i i deemed them as people people of
interest basically
so those are the the people that we're
starting with those five people and
we're going to go ahead and look through
all of the nfts that they own so going
to top projects there's 115 different uh
projects that they own and i counted how
much they own collectively so they have
44 of this project 39 of this project 21
of this project and basically we've got
a list of 115 projects to look at and to
analyze
so then what we're going to do is pull
all of the nfts from those projects
right because in the previous one we
just had a list of how many and stuff
like that so pull all of the owners all
the nfts from all those proj projects
and there we go we have this big table
right here
that is 13 000 rows it looks like all
nfts in top projects now we have the nft
address the token id and the owner okay
and with that we can create something
called an edge table this is really
useful when you're doing network
analysis which is basically what we're
trying to do is see like oh who owns
what and stuff like that
so
this is when you're doing an edge table
you're basically i'll show you what the
end result looks like the edge table
you're basically looking at the
the left and the right and i call the
left source the right target
and the weight is how much is owned by
by both people so for instance this is
like almost like a venn diagram so
there's this project called hall of fame
goat lodge and there's a project called
star sailor siblings
star sailor siblings has a bunch of
owners hall of fame goat lodge has a
bunch of owners but how many people do
they share in common how many owners
have both
and so you can look at like for instance
here's annie monkeys you know there's 60
in each type of thing it looks like um
but it must be one person probably but
like for instance blaze cats
90 21 collective they have a hundred in
common stuff like that so basically
you're looking at how many people or how
many nfts actually really are um
are owned both in that middle section of
of the venn diagram so we take the
address one the address two and then
we're counting the total rows where
we're doing an inner join it's like a
self join right because we have
basically to the same table do an inner
join on the owner is equal to the owner
and then filter out any duplicates group
by nft one group by nft2 and it looks
like i did filter where it had to be at
least 50. so i just wanted the ones
where we had a lot right and with this
edge table we can do a lot of cool
things
i basically end up renaming some stuff
right here drop some of the nands um
rename once again but then we can start
creating visualization so using network
which once again is from this library up
here pi vis network we can make this
really cool interactive
network
and basically do that step by step you
first just generate it and then you go
through the edge data and add the node
the next node and then the edge the edge
is what connects two nodes and then i
also added some uh
naming on it so you can basically see
who owns what and it made this really
really really pretty graph
right here which is like interactive
and basically lets you show the bigger
the size of the node the more people are
involved so for instance crypto punx has
quite a few but if you zoom in here you
can see that the lines are not even
thickness so for instance this line
right here is not as thick as that line
right there and so the the thicker the
line represents that that particular
edge has more owners and so this will
kind of give you an interesting view of
the nft world and how different projects
are related you notice things like mute
name yacht club is kind of one of those
key ones that indicates these two
different like clusters which is kind of
interesting um you can notice that tree
verse and arcade nft aren't nearly like
those are kind of outliers anyways you
can do a lot of different analysis with
this and really take it to a whole next
level so there you have it that's an
intro to doing some nft analysis using
the moonstream data set pretty cool
graph we made if i do say so myself and
network analysis there's so much we can
do we can figure out which one has the
highest connectivity which one has the
most betweenness and is like the most
important for those two different like
uh clusters that we saw there's a lot of
different ways that you could take this
and so please go ahead and fork the
github repo once again that is in the
description down below that you can only
access if you have subscribed to my
channel just kidding about that but not
really but kind of um i appreciate all
you guys watching i'll catch you in the
next one peace
you

Title: Data Science Movie? Ken Jee Actor? Review of Unlocked by Z by HP

Description: Z by HP just made a data science movie? In this video, I give my review of the short film for data scientists that included cameo from data scientist YouTuber, @KenJee_ds 

Watch the movie on Peacock: https://www.peacocktv.com/watch/asset/movies/unlocked

Check out the challenges: https://www.hp.com/unlocked

0:00 Introduction To Movie
1:44 Review
2:43 Challenge Introduction
3:15 Critiques 
4:00 Summary 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:






Video Transcript:
z by hp released a new short film today
titled unlocked that is an adventure
drama grid specifically for data
scientists and out of 10 i'd say it's uh
[Music]
hi everyone welcome back to my channel
where i create weekly data content but
yes you heard me right z by hp a
computer making company released a movie
and not only a movie but an adventure
movie with guns bad guys and car chases
and it was made for data scientists if
you're just as confused as i was let me
explain z by hp is part of hp hewlett
packard they make high-powered computer
workstations specifically configured for
data professionals they're like any
other business and trying to advertise
in this crazy world but recognize that
we the general public kinda hate ads and
they're not wrong so they decided to
find something we all love
streaming so they hired a production
company and created unlock so what
exactly is unlocked the creators
describe it as a cinematic epic
international story of how a ragtag team
of data scientists would use data to
unlock great mysteries of the world and
to be honest wow that sounds a little
bit dramatic but in reality unlocked is
a 34 minute adventure commercial
adventure commercial advent commercial
commerce adventure something like that
plot is a girl has traveled to guatemala
in search of a mystical healing flower
when she runs into a local cartel and
has huge trouble she then needs help
from her data scientist friends to save
her life and locate that magic flower
the movie itself could be a standalone
short film but there's some very clear
lines that are said to advertise z by hp
and rightfully so they sponsored the
video but don't get me wrong even with
that i still really enjoyed the movie is
it perfect no will it when an oscar
probably not but could my wife who
doesn't have a data job and doesn't
particularly love data sit down and
watch it yeah probably and more
importantly will you as a data
aficionado enjoy it i think so and
here's why one there really isn't any
data movies out there or any data
entertainment am i right like there's
not just a ton of data movies correct me
if i'm wrong in the comments but i can
name one maybe moneyball i guess off the
top of my head but there's not a ton so
honestly it was just really fun to see a
movie directed entirely to me in my
interests two our good friend ken g
makes his debut on the big screen on
instagram a few weeks ago he hinted at
something big was coming and now we can
see that end result
ken i think you have a very bright
future in acting and three the
techniques and algorithms used in the
movie made a lot of sense i thought they
were pretty realistic and i had fun
thinking about how i would go about
solving the problem using data science
that's actually the next coolest part
about the movie there's actually four
entire data science challenges and data
sets that accompany this movie so
honestly it's pretty cool because that
makes it almost interactive it's like as
if you are in the movie by visiting
hp.com unlocked you can see the
challenges that highlight data
visualization natural language
processing audio analysis and image
analysis that all tie extremely well
into the movie and would be pretty fun i
think this is a really unique
entertaining idea and honestly i can't
wait to try some of the challenges now
of course there are parts of the movie
that weren't as good let's just be
honest for instance sometimes it did
feel like the advertisements were really
forced my favorite plug was when one of
the characters smashes a bad guy on the
head with a backpack with her hp laptop
inside and upon examining it after
nothing has happened to the laptop
because it is quote really sturdy i also
laughed at some of the coding slash
computational times like they somehow
put together a super complex image
scraping clustering algorithm in just
like a few seconds and even the best
data scientists in the world would take
a lot longer to make that it would at
least take like an hour and of course
this is a short film it's only 34
minutes so it's not really practical to
actually have it be realistic i
understand and was the plot bulletproof
probably not but i thought it was really
fun and i thought it was adventurous and
so i didn't really care that much
overall i really liked the movie it
honestly just made me smile and made me
happy i'd be comfortable giving it a
solid 8 out of 10 as i felt was really
fun and really relatable and i
definitely think it's worth your time so
i'll go ahead and put the link in the
description down below you can watch it
for free on peacock and it's a super
short watch you can be like me and watch
it at the treadmill at the gym and get
some calories burnt at the same time
also have the link to the data sets and
challenge in the description down below
so you can check those out and that's it
that's the review 8 out of 10 would
recommend to a friend and if you enjoyed
this video i'd love it if you left a
comment and a like every time you smash
the like button another la eterna flower
is planted and you'll get the reference
after you've watched the movie but it's
a good thing okay and if you have any
questions about the movie or any of your
own thoughts or comments or your own
review i'd love to see them down below
in the comments thank you for watching
and i'll see you in future videos
[Music]
you

Title: Best Data Science Project EVER?

Description: In this video, I‚Äôll explain what THE best project you can do for data science and how you can accomplish it.

I‚Äôll give you my 5 step recipe for making a great data science project so you can find a data analytics job. 

If you need to find datasets, check out Kaggle.com and Google Dataset Search Engine

If you‚Äôre thinking about building a project, let me know in the comments down below üëá


‚úÖ If you liked this video, please smash the like button and subscribe to support the algorithm
 
MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#Data #DataScience #Analytics

Video Transcript:
the best project that you could possibly
do for data science is
all right everyone welcome back this is
avery smith here i'm going to break down
what's the best project to do for data
sciences the best possible project you
can possibly do but i first need to
start off by saying
that is clickbait there is i'm just
gonna get out of the way right now that
is purely clickbait there is no best
data science project okay and before you
stop watching or before you stop
listening
give me a chance okay in terms of what
the best project you could possibly do
it's the one that you actually finish
because there are so many unfinished
projects out there i mean just be honest
with me guys how many of you have
started a project and then just like
left it to die on kaggle or left it to
die
on your
jupiter notebook or just never reopened
it again all right my hands up too like
i've done that as well and i definitely
know that you guys have done that so the
best data science project you guys could
ever possibly do is the one that you're
going to finish and do a good job of so
let me give you a few tips to actually
do a project that you're going to finish
are you ready okay the first step is one
to choose a hobby something you really
enjoy you love it like for instance i
really like basketball i'm wearing my
utah jazz shirt right now i really like
sports i really like to run those are
some hobbies that i think would be
interesting to me it could be reading it
could be cooking it could be traveling
whatever you like to do in your free
time go ahead and select that as a hobby
and the reason we're going to do that is
we're going to base our project off of
that hobby because one of the biggest
problems with projects is that you just
get bored or you get discouraged like
there's no point to this but if you're
intrinsically motivated to actually do
the project in the first place that is
an excellent start and it's going to
help you do the project more so first
step one is choose that hobby step two
is niche down a little bit more into
that hobby so for instance if i said i
like basketball i might niche more down
into the utah jazz or if i said i like
traveling i might look at a trip i took
or i might look at a specific
you know flights or maybe a certain
hotel branch niche down a little bit
more or certain place that's probably
better like london or paris or something
and niche down that hobby into something
a little bit more specific the more
specific you can be the better okay step
three is to ask an important question
that you would like answered so for
instance if we go back to my example
with the utah jazz we just had the trade
deadline i could say what trade could
the jazz have made
to make the team better or if you're
going to do traveling you could say you
know what is the most trafficked part of
new york city or
what subway station
you know is the dirtiest or has the most
complaints or something like that ask
some sort of question that you're
genuinely really
interested in like something that you'd
love to know the answer to okay and then
fourth you're going to try to find a
data set that matches that question so
you're going to try to find the data
it's always easier to find data than to
collect the data so a lot of people
don't know where to go to find these
data sets but definitely try these two
resources number one is the google data
set search engine it's awesome it's just
for data sets and it gives you a lot of
good interesting data sets and yes
google owns it and you can just google
it basically and two is kaggle.com i
love kaggle.com for a multitude of
reasons but one of them is they have
really good data sets so definitely
check out kaggle and the google dataset
search engine i always have the hardest
time saying that phrase it's just like
data data set search google engine it's
just too many words together okay then
you have the hobby the niche of the
hobby and you asked an important
question then you're gonna go ahead and
find that data and then fifth once
you've found that data you just go ahead
and start it doesn't matter what you're
using you could do it all in excel you
could do it all in google sheets you
could do in tableau you could do in
power bi you could do it in python you
could do it in our it doesn't really
matter what platform you're using you're
doing sql doesn't matter what platform
you're using as long as you're coming up
with business answers to that business
question you asked earlier as long as
i'm trying to find the analysis of who
could be the the next guy for the utah
jazz or i'm just trying to figure out
what subway station is the dirtiest and
i'm like marking down in my notes and
i'm documenting what i'm doing and i'm
telling a story about it it doesn't
really matter what medium you're using
or even how well you do it that's kind
of a secret it doesn't even have to be
that good as long as you write a
compelling story around it and you're
not focused on the data but answering
the question using the data that's where
a lot of people get tripped up and to be
honest if your project fails that's a
success you can say hey this is what i
thought of i i picked a hobby i niched
it down i found a data set i did some
data exploration and i realized it's not
possible to answer the business question
i originally set out to do that's
valuable and recruiters and employers
should definitely look at that as really
good experience because there's a lot of
problems that we can't actually solve
and being able to recognize hey i can't
solve this problem is a valuable skill
in and of itself once you've done all
that analysis you might think okay this
is great i'm done i did a project and
congratulations you totally did but
please do not stop there because you're
missing the sixth and maybe the most
important step and that is to share it
you need to share it with the whole
world you need to tell everyone your
neighbor your mom your cousin your
friend you need to tell people on
linkedin you need to tell people on your
resume you need to tell people on
instagram on facebook just share that
story with as many people as you
possibly can and why it's because it's a
lot of numbers you never know who's
going to see that and how that person
might have a job opening or might know a
friend who knows a friend who owns a
data company and has a spot especially
for you so if you do not share it is
almost as if you did not do the project
and when you are sharing you want to
make it a story you're not just sharing
like the end results of like oh my
accuracy for predicting the weather was
76
using you know
uh
multivariate linear regression no no one
cares about the percentage no one cares
about what algorithm you use everyone
cares about the story so you need to
write it as if it's a story instead of
just writing it like it's a homework
assignment in real life there are no
homework assignments there's only
solving business values and everyone
loves to hear it through a story so
figure out a way that you can tell your
story whether that's a youtube video
like this or whether it's a reel on
instagram or it's an article on medium
that's one of my favorite ways or you
just have a blog and a portfolio with
the blog you need to share that project
in my opinion the best data science
project it's the one you like because
that's the one you'll finish and that's
the one you'll share with others and if
you like it then you're doing it to like
it and not just to do it for homework
and stuff like that so i encourage you
guys to start your own best project
start doing a data science project you
actually love that you'll actually
finish and you'll be excited to do and
then share with others that is my
challenge for you guys today and hey if
you need a little help that is what i do
at data clear jumpstart i'm always happy
to help with personal projects so as
always guys if you found this useful
please subscribe share it with a friend
share with your mom your aunt your
cousin your dog i don't care just send
it to someone and let me know down in
the comments if you want to do a
personal project and what that personal
project might be i'll try to respond to
as many as i possibly can as always i
have a new video coming out every week
where i try to help you guys with data
content to up level your data career and
with that that's all i got that's the
best data science project i could
possibly give you and i'm done
you

Title: No Data, No Machine Learning

Description: In this video, I explain the importance of having data before starting a machine learning project. 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#AverySmith #DataScience #MachineLearning

Video Transcript:
you have no data you have no machine
learning you have no algorithms
so many of you know i have been a data
science freelancer consultant the last
year that's given me the chance to meet
a lot of different people with a lot of
different backgrounds a lot of different
businesses in a lot of different fields
it's been really fun and really
exhausting at the same time but i've
definitely learned a lot so over the
past year i've had the opportunity to
work with like 20 different businesses
in you know probably 20 different
industries and today i want to tell you
a story about one of them so i get a lot
of inbound leads via linkedin in my
website and one day i got an inbound
lead with a message on linkedin with a
founder telling me hey i've heard that
you do data science stuff i have a data
science problem would you be interested
to talk more and i said yeah sure and so
we ended up
getting on a phone call and and talking
and it turns out this this founder is
the founder of a wearable device company
so you think like apple watch you know
smart wearable devices things like that
and we got talking and they're like oh
yeah we want to make these algorithms so
that our wearable device can basically
count certain things that a human does
throughout the day and that can be you
know just going throughout the day they
can be during exercise but basically we
want to put some smart algorithms on our
wearable device and i said okay sure i
don't think that's no problem we can do
that
and we got talking a little bit more
okay and whenever i'm trying to
talk to these clients you have to think
these things through because you're
trying they're trying to evaluate you
and they want to know hey how much is
this project going to cost and you know
basically nothing about them and nothing
about their projects so you ask probing
questions to try to understand as much
as you can in a little amount of time so
you can give an accurate estimate so i
said okay well do you have do you have
data for these algorithms or do we need
to collect this data and they assured me
oh no we have we have data for these
algorithms no problem we have we have
data we've been setting this up and
we've collected a little bit of data we
want to collect more data but we've
collected a little bit of data
and i said okay great and i gave them an
estimate and a bid and they accepted it
and we got started with the project but
here's where things get a little bit
interesting so when i started the
project i said all right send me over
the data and i got an email over with
like a 20 line csv
and i said oh okay
uh
did i miss part of the data oh no that's
that's our data
so they had recorded someone for like 30
seconds
and wanted me to create a pretty complex
algorithm out of those 30 seconds and
this is where we get in today's topic of
what is not machine learning so
basically whenever you're doing machine
learning or any sort of algorithms you
have to have data behind it you can't
just like magically pull it out of a hat
and be like oh well
um
the wind is blowing and the data you
have and so the answer is four like it
doesn't come out of nowhere the only
thing that machine learning really can
do is rely on previous results in
previous data to predict what will
happen in the future now of course the
future is in the past and so things can
be a little bit different and machine
learning algorithms can accommodate that
but if you don't have a starting place
of existing data you don't have a
starting place and so i had to end up
telling this client oh i'm so sorry we
can't actually do
a machine learning algorithm if you only
have one you know one example of the
data it was like barely anything at all
in order to make this type of machine
learning algorithm we'd have to at least
have you know a dozen if not two dozen
if not a hundred runs of the similar
data so that we can come up with an
algorithm
and they were all mad at me like oh but
you said you could make an algorithm and
you clearly don't know what you're doing
and i said well we can do our best when
we have you know one row we can come up
with first principles right um you know
you don't need a data science project to
explain gravity for instance we can we
can rely on on data when when we know
first principles behind that when
there's math and science behind it but
if we're trying to find a pattern that
really doesn't exist we don't know the
pattern yet we can't just pull it out of
thin air so that is not
what machine learning is you need to
have data and if you don't have data you
don't have a machine learning model so
that is my little soap box for today is
if you have no data you have no machine
learning you have no algorithms um so
whenever you're talking to your boss
your peer your co-worker a friend and
they're like hey i i heard you know you
know how to program i heard you know
data science i heard that you know
how to you know do machine learning i
have a project for you you should always
say okay well how much data have you
collected because i can't even really do
anything until we've started to collect
some data and you know what sometimes
they don't know what data to collect
right and that was this the the case
with this client they were like well can
you help me know what data to collect
and that in itself is a service is
helping people recognize what data do
they need to actually do something
interesting with data science because
data science is such a hot topic right
everyone wants to be machine learning
everyone wants to be a smart device
everyone wants ai but people don't know
you know the steps to go from a regular
business to a smart business they need
help with with knowing what steps to
take that's a great opportunity for you
to consult or freelance and help them
say okay if you want to go from a to z
we have to get to b first and b is just
collecting a lot of data and storing
that data so that is my story for today
you need data to do machine learning you
need data to do algorithms and i hope
this helps you in your data career if
you're just getting started with your
data career i have a 33 page pdf to help
you get started to help you learn the
basics and i have that in the show notes
down below definitely please check that
out and as always if you enjoyed this
video please subscribe it really helps
the channel grow

Title: My Review of Georgia Tech MS Analytics (OMSA)

Description: In this video, I give my opinion if YOU should do the Masters in Analytics from Georgia Tech (OMSA). I‚Äôll share my experience, what I thought was good, and not so good, and help you make your decision!

0:00 Introduction 
0:48 Why Did I Get A Master‚Äôs?
1:51 Basic Program Information 
2:55 The Pro‚Äôs
5:15 The Con‚Äôs
8:43 Class Review
10:59 Final Thoughts

If you have any questions about the program, please feel free to leave them in a comment below! 




MORE DATA ANALYTICS CONTENT HERE:

#Analytics #DataScience #DataAnalytics

Video Transcript:
hi my name is avery smith and in this
video i'll be reviewing georgia tech's
online masters of analytics
i'll tell you the good the bad and the
mediocre and i'll be as honest as i can
possibly be and tell you the differences
between the tracks what classes i took
how i'd rate those classes and life
after degree but let me first disclose i
do run a data science project camp
called data career jumpstarts and hence
one could argue that i have conflicts of
interest here however i'm going to put
that aside and try to keep this as
objective as i possibly can and give my
honest feedback i also want to say that
although i learned a lot in the program
i already had data science jobs before i
started the degree i worked as a data
scientist at vapor sense as an undergrad
and then moved on to exxon mobil after
graduating if you want to know my full
data story i have another youtube video
that i'll pop up on the screen right now
and on the show notes as well so why did
i get a masters if i was already in data
science well i chose to get a master's
less to transition into data but more to
cement myself and be seen as an expert
to land more senior jobs and to be a
consultant and be an influential figure
so i already knew how to code in python
i knew what machine learning was and i
had used it in real life business
examples previously to starting the
program i just want to make sure that
you guys understand where i'm coming
from so that you can make an accurate
assessment of my review so i started the
degree in august of 2019 and finished in
august of 2021 and i did it while i was
working full time the first four
semesters i was working at exxon mobil
and i finished the last two semesters
while i was running my consulting
business no data science education
business data career jumpstart the
program is 36 credit hours with each
course being three credit hours meaning
you have to take a total of 12 classes
that means if you take two classes a
semester like i did you end up taking
six semesters total and i did fall
spring summer fall spring summer but you
can really go as slow as you want at
your own pace if you want to go faster
you do need special permission though
the program consists of three tracks the
analytical tools business analytics and
computational data analytics but in the
end they only differ by two electives so
they really don't matter the track isn't
on your degree so they don't really mean
anything they're just for fun i guess i
don't know what they're for the program
is a joint effort by the iyse industrial
and system engineering mgt management
and cse computer science and engineering
departments and they each teach
different classes and parts of the
program the analytical tools track is an
extra two iyse classes the business
analytics track is an extra two
management classes and the computational
track is an extra two computer science
classes 15 hours of the degree five
classes are core coursework with the
remaining 15 being electives but keep in
mind you still need to satisfy certain
requirements with those remaining 15 you
just have a few extra choices between
them the remaining six credit hours are
the practicum which is like a
semester-long project or internship the
supply project for you from companies
like at t or other large companies or
you can get permission to do it for your
own company or rather let me rephrase
the company that you work for we'll come
back to that in a minute okay we'll go
ahead and hop into the pros now let's
start with the best parts overall i
think the program is a pretty good bang
for your buck okay one of the best parts
about the program is the price point the
entire program costs around thirteen
thousand dollars and that's pretty great
and other master's programs the united
states can cost double or triple that
price and it's from a brand name tech
school georgia institute of technology
so that's pretty good really other pros
include the online learning format gosh
i love to be able to turn the tables on
my professor and put them on 2x speed
and go through that lecture so fast i
felt like i had the power also it was
awesome to be able to rewind and
re-watch parts until i made sure i
understood the concepts to help with
that they also had a live transcription
of the video which made listening a
little bit better because it showed you
the words the professor was saying and
you heard them so that was pretty sweet
i also personally enjoyed being able to
control my schedule and choose when i
wanted to watch lectures with work
family and other obligations it was
really nice to have the flexibility in
my schooling hours so every week or
every other week you have a new module
that contained a dozen or so video
lectures and a pretty lengthy homework
assignment the videos are usually of a
professor in front of a green screen
talking through a powerpoint and it's
actually pretty engaging and well
formatted teachers read from a
teleprompter and the videos are well
scripted it's important to think though
does this fit your learning style do you
like that flexibility do you mind
learning a little bit on your own are
you okay using google to learn for me
personally i liked it and it worked
really well in addition to the modules
which are hosted inside of canvas the
program has a pretty organized
unofficial slash official slack channel
it started unofficially and now is being
somewhat adopted as official and to be
honest it might be the best part of the
program to be honest it was fun to meet
my peers ask them questions meet other
people going through the same journey
that i was and even alum are pretty
active there and they'll say things like
hey my company is hiring or hey let me
help you with this homework question and
yes you heard me right
there is alums who are done with the
program that will help you with your
technical homework questions and i am
not one of those alums so do not ask me
for help okay next i do think the school
places jobs pretty well big companies
like at t and accenture donated millions
to the school and have their employees
take the degree and they hire pretty
actively out of the program other alum
are working for big tech companies like
amazon facebook and google and i can
honestly say facebook and amazon did
reach out to me while i was in the
program and after for a potential job so
there's a lot of good there but let's
get into the cons now and the stuff i
didn't like as much remember i have to
be brutally honest for your own sake
right so are you ready for this i
genuinely only really liked about half
of my classes the other half were pretty
meh i'll go into an in-depth class
review later in this video but i will
say i did miss out on some of the
program's coolest classes and there's a
couple reasons why that occurred and
some were my fault and some were the
programs so first i finished the program
the last two semesters while i was
starting up my own entrepreneur
businesses and ended up taking some
easier classes to manage the load of
running a consulting firm moving across
the united states and taking these
classes but at the same time i was
somewhat forced to take these easier
classes as the harder classes filled up
so fast there was two semesters when i
was unable to get into the classes i had
hoped and planned to get into
because there's only so many seats and i
just wasn't fast enough registration is
one of those events where you can't be
even a minute late or you'll miss your
chance a reason for this is the csc
classes computer science are the more
interesting classes and they're split
seat wise with another degree the school
offers the masters of computer science
and they have about 85 of the seats in
those classes and so only a few are left
over for analytics students like me and
so i missed out so there's only about 50
of the classes that were good and the
good classes were hard to get into so i
don't know i was about the program
didn't prepare me for a career as much
as i would have liked it to there is
very little emphasis on soft skills
little emphasis on portfolios little
emphasis on interviewing and real life
projects in fact i don't think i ever
heard them say the word portfolio at all
during the program and there was surely
nothing taught about it and this was the
biggest thing missing as i was already
in the field it wasn't a huge deal but
it definitely felt missing and that's
why i've truly tried to emphasize those
things in my own data science education
course data career jumpstart i try to
center the entire learning platform
around building a portfolio with real
life projects i also have an entire
selection focusing on resumes
interviewing linkedin etc because at the
end of the day most of us only go to
school to get a job and so we can make
money and if you don't focus on the
outcome then what's really the point
right another thing i was thinking about
was i don't remember covering sql at all
like ever we covered python and r for
sure but i don't remember writing any
sql queries at all my entire two years
there and that seems so bizarre i think
i have to be remembering incorrectly but
i'm pretty sure i'm not another reason i
was frustrated with the program is they
advertise courses they don't actually
teach and yes you heard me right the
list classes that don't even exist yet
they're planning on them existing in
five years down the road but you can't
take them in your two years at the
school that feels like false advertising
to me lastly and i realize this is a
little bit petty on my part but i was
mad about the practicum you can get
permission to do the practicum for the
company you work for pretty easily so if
i was still at exxonmobil i could have
done the practicum with exxon which
would have been pretty nice right double
dip a little bit kill two birds with one
stone but nope at the time of the
practicum i was running a small
analytics firm snow data science and i
was told i could not do any project i
was doing for my own business i had
paying clients with projects for me to
do but nope those can't count as the
practicum so you can do a project for
your employer but not if you are your
own employer it's a no-go ugh i know it
probably makes sense but i was juggling
a lot of the time and just didn't feel
fair by the way i did end up doing my
practicum with the utah jazz after
sending this awesome linkedin post to a
lot of people and trying to get a lot of
attention and it ended up working out
really just fine i had a lot of fun
doing the practicum with the utah jazz
but
i was mad okay okay so now to the actual
classes i'll go ahead and list the
classes i took and then go into more
detail after so my first semester i took
regression analysis isye
6414 an introduction to analytics
modeling
isy6501 next semester i took
introduction for computing for data
analytics csc 6040 and simulation isy
6644
third semester i took data analytics in
business mgt 6203 and computational data
analysis iyse 6740 and fourth semester i
took data visual data and visualization
analytics csc 6242 and business
fundamentals for analytics mgt 8803 the
fifth semester i took data analysis for
continuous improvement mgt 8823 and
digital marketing management 6311. sixth
semester i did my practicum with utah
jazz and that was a lot of fun for a
total of 12 classes really just 10
classes and then the practicum counts
for two of those classes you have to
take introduction analytics modeling and
introduction for computing data
analytics and business fundamentals for
analytics as your three core classes but
in fact you actually have to get a b in
two of those three classes to move on
the advanced required core classes are
the data and visualization analytics and
data analytics in business after that
you need to take either simulation or an
optimization class to fill your
operations research credit and then you
have two statistical elective credits to
fill and then your two regular electives
as well out of all of those classes i
rank the classes as the following are
you ready introduction to analytics
modeling data and visual analytics
introduction for computing for data
analysis we're all pretty good i really
like those courses and they were a lot
of fun okay so those four classes were
great simulation and computational data
analytics
those two are meth they were kind of
average mediocrity what i'd expect i
guess and the remaining five classes i
did not like at all
the two required business classes are
way too similar and way too basic in my
business electives i ended up choosing
marketing and continuous improvement
where well business electives okay
they're pretty dang easy simulation was
good because of the professor but i
didn't find it practical at all and for
regression i was not a fan of the
professor and she actually made me not
like regression really at all so in
conclusion overall if you're going to
shill out 13 grand on learning data
science this is probably a great way to
do it they have some solid classes a
great network a good brand name and it's
fairly affordable is it the only way to
become a data scientist no do you need
to shell out 13 grand to become a data
scientist no i don't think so and that's
why i try to offer a little bit cheaper
through data career jump start
but you can do it a lot of different
ways and i started my data career
without even paying any money but i hope
you found this review helpful if you're
considering the program feel free to ask
any questions you want in the comments
down below if you want to know something
more specific i'll try to respond and
answer that question and if you did find
this video helpful please let me know by
hitting the like button and smashing
that subscribe button and if you do do
that do do sorry i'll give you a shoot
book okay one shrew buck i try to make
free weekly data content on my youtube
and my podcast that helps level up your
data career so thank you so much again
for watching and i hope to see you guys
in future videos
[Music]

Title: Building Fun Data Science Projects (Interview With Kyle Pastor a.k.a. DataStuffPlus)

Description: In this episode, I interviewed Kyle Pastor (aka @DataStuffPlus 70K followers on Instagram). We chatted about how Kyle got started with data, why he runs his Instagram, and why he does fun data projects.

When breaking into data, it‚Äôs always important to have a portfolio of projects to show off, and who knows, these projects could turn into businesses, job offers, or sponsorship opportunities.

You can follow Kyle‚Äôs writing and tutorials on his Medium: https://kapastor.medium.com
Also, don‚Äôt miss Kyle‚Äôs data viz Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/datastuffplus/?hl=en



#DataScience #Data #Analytics

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
welcome back to the daily career podcast
everyone i'm so excited that you're here
we have an awesome episode for you up
ahead it's my interview with kyle pastor
aka data stuff plus on instagram go
ahead and follow him there the link is
in the show notes awesome account to
follow tons of really cool data
visualizations uh and other data related
posts i love following data stuff plus
so definitely follow them um on
instagram and we also have their medium
down below in the link today we had an
interview with kyle
this last week it was totally awesome we
talked a lot about data science projects
why to do them why they're fun
how kyle has found better ways to do
them over time
you can definitely check out some of the
projects that we talk about they're
listed like i said in that medium down
below so this is an awesome interview
it's kyle's one of my best data friends
out there on the social media world um
so it's super fun to spend time and talk
to him
so i'm about to get into the interview
but one thing i do want to say before we
get started is i want you guys to
download my data science roadmap if you
have not already downloaded it um i have
the link down below in the show notes
it's totally free it's a 33 p page
can't talk this morning 33 page pdf i
think you guys are really going to like
it
the other thing is this podcast is
brought to you of course by data career
jumpstart and we have an awesome awesome
awesome opportunity coming up i think
let me check the calendar here i think
it is on
february yes february 7th february 7th
we're going to be starting another round
of 21 days to data the first cohort the
january cohort is about to end maybe
you've seen the hashtag on linkedin 21
days of data
it's been an awesome
cohort and awesome course awesome
challenge people are really stepping up
to the plate and knocking it out of the
park and i want you guys to do the same
so
definitely check that out i have the
link to that down below in the show
notes as well for you guys to look at
it's 50
and it is 10 hours of data science
content plus challenges so it is a lot
of fun and you'll see start seeing
results pretty quickly so we'll go ahead
and hop into the podcast now with kyle
pastner go ahead and follow him on
medium and instagram in the show notes
down below and as always thank you so
much for listening today to career
podcast one last thing before we get
into the show and that is i don't know
what happened to my audio it is not my
best audio guys we recorded this on
instagram i don't know if it was my
airpods i don't know if it was i don't
know what the problem was but i
apologize for the uh the poor audio but
kyle's audio is crystal clear so just
don't listen to me listen to him all
right enjoy the podcast
i'm excited to have you kyle thank you
for being here
it's a pleasure
okay for those who don't know kyle and i
have been friends on instagram for like
man when did you start
oh like i started like
four years ago but back then it was like
a really like embarrassing blog of me
like programming at like six in the
morning in like fast motion
and then i only started getting back
into like two
two years ago like maybe just before the
pandemic hit yeah yeah i think i think
you're right i think i started
at the beginning of
2019 no beginning of 2020 so wait no
what year again beginning of 2020 yeah
that's been two years
so anyway stoked to have you we'll do
we'll do a little intro here so yeah for
those who don't know welcome back to the
data career podcast we are doing a live
recording here with with kyle pastner
and who is data stuff plus super excited
to have him on the program thank you
guys for for tuning in
um for those who don't know kyle you
definitely should know kyle so go ahead
and uh i'll have a link to his medium
his instagram down below so go check him
out but kyle this is a little bio for
kyle right here
he is first uh and foremost a guy that
doesn't like being bored and i can agree
with that
he enjoys exploring cool new ideas and
technology and writing and teaching
about whoever wants to listen
he went to mcmaster university in
hamilton because we got to say you are
you are canadian correct i am canadian
now i'm in like the toronto area so
there you go there you go and guys yeah
i was gonna say nice ad nice adding the
a gotta do it gotta do it
got his masters then realized he needed
to get another job so he got another
masters in quantitative finance from
waterloo so double masters here
um from there he started to work at a
big canadian bank as a full stack
developer and quant and on the side kyle
has a bunch of projects a bunch of
projects by the way um we'll talk about
those today um from a raspberry pi based
escape room in a box i don't think i
realize that um we have to talk about
that two it's called the box it's pretty
great
so gosh i literally i could go we'll get
into that later yeah we'll talk about
what we'll talk about uh he also has a
medium account which you'll find the
link down below for this podcast
where he talks about code tech talks
about all his cool stories he has a very
patient wife and two small girls one
that is just 16 months old so uh yeah
kyle
and they're
tired all the time so kyle welcome to
the podcast man thanks for having me
that's that's awesome you do so many
cool things and uh i'm so excited to you
know have you be telling your story on
on this platform because you know you
have so many cool projects and we'll
talk about all those projects but
they're so freaking interesting um
i first want to get back into your your
just like how you how you got to data in
the first place right um
you started
start studying physics correct
yeah yeah i was doing physics for like
all undergrad and like my master's
program as well yeah okay
why physics
oh man i just like
i was like really into it as a kid like
i just like like the idea of physics it
was because it's hard i was like i
really want to do it because it's
impressive that's how it started off
and then like in the end it's like
applicable to a bunch of stuff so it was
a good call because like you can apply
it like in so many different places and
primarily like the one thing i got into
was like coding pretty early on so like
when i was in high school i started
looking at like linux and like you know
just like basic web stuff and like flash
development and all this stuff um so i
got really into it and then
basically from there i just applied it
in physics and then i took a bunch of
like computing courses during like
masters and like undergrad and stuff
and then yeah and then i got to like my
i did like a computational physics
masters which was like very cool
but like
i was like okay what do i do now so
either i can go for a phd which i was
like really into academia for a while
until like the end of my master's i was
like
maybe not that but then all the guys i
knew that like graduated they're going
like into finance and stuff so
i was talking to them and they seemed
very happy and they had like nice
clothes i was like this seems cool so
like after they i've had a few chats
with them they convinced me to like to
apply to this like second like master's
program and then yeah like the rest is
history like
it was a lot like co-op and then some
finance courses here and there but
mostly like the coding like brought it
home and then like from the coding like
in order to do anything cool you need
data right so
that's sort of where that that came from
that might be a little subjective
because you could have gotten better
like a like a software developer right i
mean
yeah
i guess too kind of right yeah that's
kind of what i do now but like
yeah you know like use algorithm stuff
but like you're generally always going
to need like some form of data as like
input and then to test against and
things like that so like
i guess that's like the data connection
you know what i mean
yeah that's so interesting i guess i
guess in your your second dairy well i
guess as an undergrad what languages
were you using like how like what'd you
know
i was like a keener so i did like c plus
which was like a really bad idea because
like
it was like i always say it's like one
of the more challenging ones because
there's lots of like details about like
garbage collection and memory and all
this stuff but like it was hard so i was
like oh i gotta like do this because
it's like because it's hard um and then
i did like a little c sharp the classic
like html stuff
um and then i had to do fortran 90 which
was like really old school but like
so i tell like my older colleagues and
they're like whoa you've rather
fortran90 that's crazy i'm like yeah i
had to do it um but like and then i
start dipping into python like later on
and then python's like obviously
that's the way to go for me but
i'm with you i'm also team python but
you were using c plus plus in your
physics underground
yeah like to build like all the like for
my district not my dissertation like my
thesis and stuff and like we had like
undergraduate thesis and all this so
i was like into c plus and then i did
like a co-op in undergrad so i worked
for the canadian department of defense
for like eight months so i moved over
like across the country and went to the
military base and stuff and started like
working with them and like coding stuff
and like yeah all their software was c
plus plus two so
that's kind of like why i got that role
and then yeah it's that's
but it was like yeah it's difficult it's
not it's good for building i guess like
fast lower level software but like to
just do fun stuff it's not really where
you want to go at least i think so kind
of a pain in the butt to get fun um but
that's that's so interesting because
when i think of like a physics undergrad
i think less about learning c plus plus
and more like
you take like the ball on this side and
the ball on this side and clink them
together or like you do like kinetic
energy and potential energy i mean that
was physics one i guess and then yeah us
and then physics two this is as far as i
got in physics was you know you cover uh
like electricity and magnetism and
currents and stuff like that and then
maybe like you take like a quantum class
that's how i that's how i see physics
yeah yeah yeah you're actually like
coding a decent amount
yeah like there's some coding stuff so
like when you talk about quantum physics
stuff right what it gets into is like
you can't so problems that can't be
solved like just by like writing the
math out sometimes so you have to like
use like numerical techniques to like
solve problems and then you have to like
use like code oh yeah like matlab was
another big one that he used right so
in order to like solve like this is
getting to get too deep into it like in
order to solve like certain like
differential equations and like all this
other stuff you have to use code at some
point so like it does just necessarily
become like something you need to do and
like once you get like yeah in the
master's program it's like it's you
don't find many people doing pure like
theory where it's just like you know pen
paper just writing stuff down it almost
always comes down to like you have to do
some form of calculation or something
right
yeah yeah for sure it's actually
interesting but we did collect balls
together that was good we did the click
it so it's good
okay so you can you still know how to do
that
yeah yeah it takes practice but i got
there
that's awesome i'm actually thinking
about it you're the you're the second i
probably interviewed i don't know
i think this will be episode 35 or 36.
oh wow um and i've probably interviewed
probably like half those are interviews
so let's say 15 people and you're
actually the second physics major and
and emily vu was the first one um and
she's also i guess she's a product
manager but also garden analytics so you
physics people i've always known you
guys are smart but it turns out you can
transition pretty easily to you know the
data field or the tech field pretty
easily
yeah yeah like especially for finance
too like a lot of the times they do look
at like physics background
um so yeah it was like it was pretty
good easy easy to find a job i guess
because like
people hiring are looking for that kind
of thing and then yeah like since you
have like physics use like more like a
general knowledge of things i guess is
the way i put it and then you can apply
the lessons like different pieces right
so you can solve you learn how to solve
problems primarily in like with the
physics undergrad so that becomes like
valuable later right you don't have like
as specific as still set but you have a
pretty like solid general one
yeah and i mean i think at the end of
the day that's all we really get from
college in most places is you learn how
to learn and then you learn how to do
your job
actually when when you're at the job
yeah exactly so that makes sense so tell
me a little bit more about what you do
now you work for a bank is that correct
yeah so i work for it's called scotia
bank it's like a one of the big there's
like five huge banks in canada it's one
of the like top five or whatever
um and yeah like i do uh a lot of like
it's mostly programming in matlab and
python so what we do is like
it's like man every time i explain this
it's like it's very boring i guess
because like the finite stuff is going
to be boring we simulate stuff which is
cool so we simulate what what if the
markets go crazy and like what if like
like interest rates change and what
happens if people start pulling their
money out of banks and all that stuff
right so like
we try to forecast what happens if that
happens and see like if we're in trouble
or not or how much money we'll gain or
lose and all this kind of stuff right
and then to like support that we like
obviously have to build tools so we
built the simulation software but also
it's like
it's like cool you have simulation
software but like what do you do with it
so we help to build like i do web-based
tools basically so we build like a full
stack so we have like the data and then
we have an api that calls the methods
that we build and then we have like a
front like you use react.js so just like
a web interface so people like the
traders or like management can like go
into a website just click around run
like a simulation and see like what the
impact is
so that's like how it all ties in right
that's that's really cool so you're
basically creating you know web apps for
your organization for non-coders
non-data scientists non you know even
tech people to be able to click and drag
and you know click buttons to run
complex simulations and see what the end
result would be
yeah exactly yeah because like a lot of
the people like they're more like
there's not as many coders in our
department i guess like we're the main
like team that like does the coding
analytics stuff but like a lot of people
know exactly what they need from the
software so being able to like build an
interface where they can either upload
files that have like for example like
what are the markets gonna do in the
next like three years
or they can say i want to tweak out like
certain parameters of the model and just
run it like that's like super important
because otherwise we have to do it and i
don't want to do that so
the more like i make it easier for them
the less like a work i have to do so
it's always good that's true that's true
so this this is interesting because when
i was at exxon we we
we did something pretty similar where
you're trying to see if prices change
you know what's your margins and stuff
like that one issue we ran into was
simulations are not always easy
computational tasks and specifically
when you like are like i say you're like
a ceo or i don't know a trader or
something like that and you want to
tweak you know a couple parameters and
then you want to see the results
it it could take like an hour or two
hours
does that
do you guys solve that or you just have
to say hey you gotta wait
so like it depends so in specific cases
it's like you're kind of screwed you
just have to like rerun effectively but
we have we do this nice little thing
called like the basis function so like i
don't know like like you know like pca
type stuff like yeah you can sort of say
like well if
if one dollar is equal to if for 1.80
you get two dollars out if you put two
dollars and you make you get four
dollars out right so like it's sort of
like you can scale it up so one thing we
do is like we can run like
let's say like the one dollar version
for like i know like 1a 1b 1c for like
one dollar and they we can say what is
the impact of changing each one and the
whole idea is that like that is like our
basis so you can use like that to like
try to find another thing so you can say
if um a goes up by one and b goes up by
two
instead of having to re-simulate that
you can just say well i know how to just
like calculate it right away because i
know it just like scales with each other
right so it's just like you just get
like stuff together so like
it takes a lot of like pre-processing
because you have to run like basically
every possible combination for like
the basis but then once you have it you
don't have to calculate anything because
you have everything ready to go you just
have to sort of like multiply stuff
together and you get like the new
results and as long as you've tested it
and it's like legit then people are
pretty happy even if it's like a little
bit inaccurate so yeah there's a lot of
that going down
that's that's really interesting because
we did we did something pretty similar
at exxon where yeah you basically can
can make some approximations to
which is really interesting because
if you think about it this sometimes you
know you go on to kaggle we'll talk more
about alcohol a little bit but you go
into kaggle and people are so concerned
about the extra one percent accuracy in
their machine learning model they're
like look like your model was 90 and
mine's 91. and it's like okay great that
one percent actually doesn't matter in
fact
in your case it's more important to give
them
a quick answer than the most accurate
answer
yeah exactly because like in a real real
setting like if the number's off by like
oh no like it's off by like a thousand
dollars or something like that on like a
billion dollars nobody's gonna care if
it's off five million dollars over a
billion dollars no one's gonna care
either but like if it takes an extra day
then like it's not gonna be worth it
because whoever the person is just gonna
not want your results anymore because
either someone else gave them a handcalc
which is like close enough and they're
happy or
they just probably moved on at that
point so like yeah like the accuracy
yeah like you can't get too into the
weeds about how accurate things are as
long as like you're in the ballpark
usually so
yeah that's that's so interesting i i
just think it's fascinating they don't
teach you that really and no no it's
like it has to be so right i'm like no
it doesn't at all
just like get it close enough
yeah exactly so so interesting okay so
that's a little bit about what you do
now a little bit how you got into data
let's talk a little bit about your
instagram so you're at dataset plus
um
tell for those who don't know we have
you know 20 people watching live we have
a lot of people listening on the podcast
for those who don't know and aren't
familiar with data stuff plus describe
data stuff plus
data subplus is a visual experience
first and foremost no basically it's
like i it started off as a blog like a
video blog kind of thing for me to sort
of make myself accountable to like do
projects because like one thing i think
is pretty shared with everyone i have a
lot of ideas and usually i start off on
them and it's like oh like this i'm so
into like the specific idea and then one
week later i'm like wait a minute what
about this other idea that's really cool
and then the first idea is now dead in
the water
so i never do it again which is cool
which i'll just talk about later um but
the idea was like well if i'm committing
myself to sort of doing this like little
instagram account where i just like sort
of film myself in like stop-motion
basically coding um then maybe like
it'll keep me going right it's like when
you have like a gym buddy or whatever
and then like i thought back all the
time i would watch random guys coding in
their basement and i'm like i don't
watch that at all so why would anyone
else so
i basically dropped the account for a
while and then it basically reprised it
and i think it was because i was seeing
like lots of like really interesting
graphics on like various just like other
instagram accounts i was like these are
really cool like for example 538 um they
have some really good things bloomberg
has like some really cool uh statista as
well
and i was like kind of interested like
i like looking at these which means
other people like looking at these and
also it's like how do you make these
things like how do you make them look so
good so i think the first thing i was
trying to do was
um build some graphics that were
actually like actually look decent so i
actually messaged i think the people
like run the instagram account for 5 30
asking like what they use
and then i realized it's like oh you
basically
run make a basic chart and then you edit
everything in like photoshop basically
so
then once i started doing that i started
like you know making some small like
plots like it's just like sort of google
trend plots of like when did dnd get
popular again the answer is always but
anyways um and then like the rise of vr
and like our canadians giving their dogs
cbd and marijuana and stuff like all
that kind of like interesting stuff
um and then
it's like it was good and i liked it um
but obviously it's like a lot of work to
do that all the time because like it
does take effort
so much
a lot of effort and like i was like
it's cool or whatever but i didn't have
the time obviously to like do it all the
time like every day or anything and one
thing i learned is like if you want to
grow followers you basically get the
post once or twice a day effectively
it's like a big like once i start doing
that like things start really growing um
and then i was like wait man i could
just repost other people's stuff and
it's a lot easier but as long as i
attribute it and make sure it's cool
like um i always try to make sure that
like if i post something um if they're
like
bloomberg or whatever i just repost it
and like give credit but if they're
smaller sometimes i'll reach out and
make sure like they're cool with me like
reposting their stuff
and then now you have like sort of a
depth of content and i sort of started
like thinking about instagram as like a
mobile game where
all you sort of do is you sort of have
to find these images post them and then
you reward it with followers and
validation to your person as a person so
you know that's pretty good
yeah and then from then like honestly
like once
like yeah to grow the account i just
like followed people and they follow me
back and i would chat with people and
like the whole adage of like oh you have
to really engage with your followers is
like pretty true especially the
beginning where like you have to really
sort of chat comment like do some dms
things like that and then i think it
posted this um
thing from like either indian pixels or
some other
like i think it was indian pixels it's
one image i think of like the size of
statues and i don't know why but it blew
up in india like it got like huge and i
got like 10 000 followers from like that
one thing and from that point on like
what's once i got to that level like
every day you just start getting like as
long as you're posting every day you
just keep getting more and more
followers type thing but now it's just
sort of like a fun little like side
project that you know keep people
informed
make sure things look good it's great
yeah it's i know i really enjoy it
basically you can log on to data stuff
plus and you'll see a different image a
different data visualization you know
every day and you can get a feel and get
inspired and see how other people create
and how they display stuff so i think
it's really fun and and for those
listening who want to grow a social
media account i hope you were taking
notes um
kyle kyle and i
maybe close when we started two years
ago had pretty close to the same number
of followers and uh obviously kyle's at
70k and i'm like at 2k so listen to kyle
watch what kyle does and then that's how
you agree yeah the difference is like
you have like
quote unquote like real content it's
easy to repost stuff right so like yeah
no but i think that is something that i
think that
content creators who are successful i
think i think a lot of the times they're
more curators than they are actually
creators because creating takes so much
effort
yeah so especially in data gosh you want
to value data visualization you have to
find the data clean the data make the
data visualization and like you said
like if you want to make it look really
good clean it up in photoshop
yeah and then also like if you don't
want people to be angry the data has to
be like it has to make sense and look
good it's under another layer so like
also for the instagram account if you
want to like look at nice images you can
look at it but if you want to get mad
you could look at the comments section
usually because there's usually a lot of
like there's a lot of vitriol in there
which is great you know lots of people
engaged but
that's true but yeah people love to
troll and oh my
goodness oh
it's wonderful i get that like i get the
troll dms and like ah they're just so
good like i love it
like i just yeah it's pretty great
um okay well that's that's good um i i
guess out of you know
all that stuff that you've been doing
you've been posting um is there any
visualization like a chart or a graph or
a specific visualization that you like
the most that really sticks out to you
that's a good one actually
the most like recent one was really cool
is um i think it was a bloomberg opinion
thing i posted a few days ago
and it's showing like sort of cases and
the expected case like volatility so you
have sort of this like line and you have
like a band around the line but the way
they did is because cases are going up
and it's obviously based on like the
time of year like dates they made it so
like in polar coordinates so i could
start off in the middle and it starts
like like a spiral and like i've never
seen
i mean it only works out because cases
are rising so once the case starts to
drop it's gonna look messy but i haven't
ever seen like a banded
like chart in the same way on a polar
axis which is like really neat so like
when i posted that i was supposed to get
mostly for that one
actual like uh image um that was pretty
cool i think generally like the ones
that look really good are like the
chloroplast maps like so if you look at
here's like the most like all the like
highlighting the counties that have the
best like partying or whatever and
you'll see like a really colorful map
that like looks visually cool and a lot
of people like respond to it right which
yeah the
information content might not be
as useful sometimes but like visually it
usually looks really cool so i like
those ones a lot
and uh yeah like those are the like the
best i think like
i think i think two things are i think
both things you said are actually pretty
interesting because um i know the graph
you're talking about i'll put it in the
show notes for those who are listening
or watching on youtube so you guys can
look at it um but actually someone
posted about it on linkedin i think it
was on linkedin and said this is the
worst graph i've ever seen and i didn't
really look at it i mean i saw that it
was covered and i saw that it was you
know a spiral
you know basically almost like a spiral
line chart yeah yeah
and i didn't really look at it that
closely um and i thought okay well why
didn't they just show a line chart but
you're right it's like they were trying
to show seasonality within the cove
time frame because december january you
know february march or not march maybe
but like the winter time in the united
states or i guess north america is when
we've had a lot of coveted cases so they
were trying to show seasonality
with
the long-term effects too like the
trends i guess is what that's called
yeah so
that's the first thing is i i think i
saw someone call it the worst
visualization i've ever seen and now i
understand it now that you you actually
mentioned it so that's that's the first
thing um and then the second thing the
chloroplast i can never say that word
chlorophyll
um
which is basically a colored map um for
those of you yeah you haven't seen that
before um
those are so relatable you can go like
oh that's my state that's how oh that's
so true so yeah i think i think those
are really relatable people really enjoy
those so i agree with you um okay let's
let's transition a little bit here to to
your project so like you said you you
know you started your account to help
yourself accountable to doing some
projects you have a lot of really fun
medium definitely check that out in the
show notes um below when you're
listening um you've done a lot of data
projects you've done a cool one about
showing like the impact of global
warming kind of right and like how much
percent of a uh
you know city would be underwater if
like
and that's one you've done one on hockey
that was really cool like making hockey
um
like shot heat maps and goal heat maps
things like that yeah yeah they're
almost like sports cars though like
they're like
they're really cool i really like those
gotta make those nfts or something it'll
be good yeah there you go that is true
that's that's how we make our millions
man right there yeah um
and you've also made a lot of other maps
so do you have uh uh first off i guess
why are you making these projects um
mostly it's because like
like i find a data set that or an api
that's like kind of interesting and i'm
like what would be cool so for example
the hockey one right like a lot of my
friends are into hockey and like
honestly like
i don't watch too many sports i'm trying
though so it's almost like an attempt
for me to like under get into sports
using the data and i'll tell you right
now it did fail but the graphic looks
cool so
yeah like the nhl has this um like open
api so it's not like promoter or
anything but if you go to like nhl.com
and you look for how they pull their
data so i actually wrote an article
about like uh web scraping like a few
days ago
and one of the main things is like you
could scrape for data on a website but
if you look at the like if you inspect
into the website you look at sort of the
you can see like what network polls it's
doing you can actually see like oh
there's something it's referring to
called like
api.nhl.ca or whatever.com and if you
look at that the question is like well
what does it do
it's providing all the data to the
website like the nhl website right with
all the player stats and all the stuff
and like you have game summaries like oh
like so-and-so scored a goal at this
time from this point on the ice right
so you start exploring it
and i was like this is really neat
because it actually has like i didn't
think they ever had this but for every
shot and every um goal and every like uh
block and hit and stuff like that in the
nhl for every game they have a time
stamped like a game timestamp and the
location so you can say at this time of
the game uh this player took a shot from
this location and they scored or they
missed or they got like blocked or
something like that right and i was it's
such a rich data set and i have not seen
like i've seen stuff for soccer that
like looks at sort of where player
positions are i was like this is like
very cool so i started playing with the
data set
and then
i guess the difference is like when you
look at the data it's like kind of messy
because it's like a lot of like dots
everywhere right and like it's not super
useful because unless you make sort of a
heat map of some sort um it doesn't
really give you like useful information
you see like basically just a bunch of
random dots and then i was like oh like
the standard thing you do if you have a
bunch of samples is you can bend them
into like discrete bins and you sort of
say well there's more shots in this
location versus this location and then
you get an idea of like like what
players shooting from where where are
they succeeding how often do you score
goals things like that
and then i was like oh what would be
look even cooler is a hex bin which i
couldn't find like as a part a standard
like part of like on like a package
really right easily at least
so the net the main thing i want to do
is like build a like set of code in
python using like a package like called
matplotlib which is like sort of a
you can do a lot of things you could
like draw like lines in it so it's kind
of like primitive
but like built a little thing that sort
of like makes like a hex plot i'm like
oh this is cool now what can i do with
it so like i kind of like build like
little tools that i can use later to
like do other
like data projects right so this is like
one of them is the hex plotting um so
yeah i just applied it to like all these
shots and then i was like this is like
pretty neat then like what what's
missing here i'm like oh there's no rink
so there's no context for the shots are
so i went to photoshop built like a
little rink
uh then copied and pasted the image on
that and then add the like player tokens
and stuff so it's like a fun little
project um
yeah so like that was like
like i guess i the whole thing is like
either i want to try a new graphic i
want to try a new set of data to see
what i can do with it or i want to build
like a simple tool that i feel like
missing in like the ecosystem usually
and that's where everything i think it's
driven
i think that's that's so cool and uh
it's it's so interesting that that nhl
data is just like open source because
um
i mean you can you can kind it's hard to
get that that data for other sports um
yeah and i'm not i think it was probably
hard to get the data for that
it wasn't paywalled at least like you
didn't have to sign up for like a key
and all this stuff which is great
yeah when i and i don't know if i did
this the right i did a similar project
for basketball and i had to i had to web
scrape espn um and you have to be yeah
you have to like set a a sleep timer for
like five seconds between
web scrapes because you don't want to
get uh caught for being
because you're not a robot quote-unquote
exactly i'm a human yeah i think i think
that's awesome and i'm just rolling
through your medium right now and you
have
you have uh so much so much so many cool
projects um
so many cool projects one thing i want
to talk about though um is
you actually kind of mentioned it right
there was you
you had this idea you went okay you want
to plot you know hockey shots and you're
like oh i'm gonna i'm gonna bend them
instead of just having them be a scatter
so i'm going to hex bin because hex
spins rad um that's what you said it was
oh but this could be useful for other
projects now i want to pause there for a
moment because that is what makes kyle
awesome and it is what makes me very not
awesome
is that thought process of oh
you know what i might do this in the
future so let's make clean structured
code that's reusable and modular and
could be used in the future so what
other tricks have you learned that makes
like a good project and also
tricks that you've learned to keep your
project project going because you know
you work full-time so you might work on
a project for you know a saturday or
whatever and then you come back three
saturdays later and how do you keep it
fresh
yeah hello
sir
hey anyways uh yeah for the podcast
someone just said hi in the chat um
yeah so like
earlier when i was doing stuff i would
always like write a bunch of code and
then i would have my computer and then
like honestly i would just get like
distracted with something else either
like another project like a cool idea or
like i'll start reading a book randomly
for the first time forever just like
totally just forget about what i was
doing and then like a month later i'm
like oh yeah i had that like really cool
project going on like i should get back
into it and then like i literally would
go on my computer and would not be able
to find any of the files i had because i
like named them weirdly and like i don't
remember making like
project wt5 like what does that even
mean right so
one thing i started doing is i always
assume that i'm going to get distracted
later and i'm going to end up just like
totally forgetting about what i'm doing
but also assume that i'll get into it
again later like there's some of the
server reciprocity so like assuming i'll
forget something and then in a month
from now i want to do it again
and basically
build
slower and more thoughtfully at the
beginning so you know so i can actually
go back and look at the project and be
able to pick up right where i left off
right so like the first thing i started
doing was using github so for you those
that don't know github is like it's
called like a code repository and the
idea is that
i write code on my computer
and then i commit it to this repository
which is like online
and it keeps track of every change in
every file that's ever been done so
it's sort of like saving right
but um
you can go any point you can sort of
pull it back from the website and then
continue working on it which is one
thing because then you can instead of
say your computer dies or like you
switch up um i know like i'm using linux
and go back to windows so and so forth
you can just always pull your code back
and then you can continue where you left
off which is a good thing so that's like
the main thing so you always know where
your code is which is surprisingly
difficult to know after like a month
um and then another thing is like
i would always try to build like a lot
really fast and then i would get back to
it and have no idea what i was doing
because like there's so much spaghetti
code that like i have no comments i've
no idea what's going on so i started
trying to document things a lot more so
even like for the example the medium
account like a lot of these
some of these articles are specifically
documentation for me to go back to so if
i ever want to do something like this
again
instead of having to like rip through my
own code and look at it i actually have
like a nicely formatted step by step how
to of like how to get
roughly to where i was
so doing things like that it makes it so
like you're building stuff really slow
so to be like it might not be as like
sexy because you don't get as much done
you don't get a final result as easy
but
thinking long term you come back a month
later and you can actually say oh i know
exactly what i was working on because i
left myself notes i could look at this
mini article i made to like get back
into the idea of like what i was trying
to look at with it and then i know where
my code is so now i can actually go and
continue my project without like
smashing my head against the wall type
thing right
so like as long as you're always
building stuff assuming you're going to
drop it within a week and have to come
back to it a month later
then it actually makes it so i'll finish
a project maybe one day in the future
instead of just like
you know having a big laundry list of
things that i thought were cool and then
it just never happened
yeah that's that's so awesome i think um
you know posting the medium
there's so many there's so many good
reasons to be posting projects to medium
like you said one it forces you to write
cleanly and like coherently uh your code
and i guess the the quote-unquote value
of that you're bringing and the process
yeah um two it's like a great resource
for you to look back on in the future
um and be like okay that's how i did
that three
it's a great portfolio it's a great
place to host a portfolio to send
recruiters to send employers hey look at
all these interesting projects that i've
worked on
and and four
um you get paid you can get paid on
medium
and
you don't have to sell anything you just
have to post on medium and you'll get a
little a little uh little chunk in the
mail yeah
well in the paypal or whatever
i don't i don't mean to brag but i make
literally maybe tens of dollars a month
so it's kind of a big deal right so
just keep that in mind it but it is cool
like another thing is like a like you
mention all the good things about it
another thing is that also other people
are gonna like people are thankful when
you make something and make it coherent
like and a big like one of the like this
is like random but like one of my
biggest articles that has most views is
like how to deploy a flask api on
windows
and it's such a generic thing that like
everyone's looking for it but it's such
a pain to do and then i'm like i found a
way to do it because i had to sort of
figure out how to do it for work and
like all that other stuff and like i
hope no one ever no one else has to do
this at all again because it's so
annoying so i wrote an article about it
right and actually like people like
message me like oh like this is making
my life so much easier like this is
something i always like have a problem
with so it feels good and also there's
like
if you're developing a project that like
say you're developing like you're my own
like i don't know like the hex bin
project or whatever um
it's also like a nice way to
have something out there that you can
always point to and say oh i made this
right because usually when you make code
um it sits in a repository somewhere
it's all say it's like you make the best
code in the world and produces an image
right
and it's like a really cool image you
post it once and it's good to go like no
one's ever going to find that code again
and the value of actually like building
something
at that level even if it's like the most
well-engineered thing it's just gone
because it's a ghost like no one uses it
just it exists on a repository somewhere
but having an article that references it
makes it so it's actually like
accessible and attainable by other
people
so it makes it less lonely i guess to
code projects in a weird way
you're so right um i think i like
sometimes i'll do like whole project
tutorials from a medium article right
and like it teaches me so much when i
get stuck coding you know
you either are using stack overflow or
you're probably using a medium article
so yeah thank you for for riding the
flask one actually ironically right
before this this call
um
i help i do i i'm like a ta basically
for an mit data engineering bootcamp and
i was literally
just doing
flask application deployment
yeah there you go remind you to check
that uh that medium article right there
right there you go useful the answer the
answer is use linux that's basically the
answer is don't use windows okay
if you can if you can yeah
well
you'll get there that's good
there are ways so
one thing i did want to mention is um
i used to like when i was younger i used
to be like how do we like move forward
as a society like
like how do we like
you know all of a sudden it's you know
2022 i guess and we're like landing
rockets back from space back on earth
like what the heck like how did we get
here and i think i think one thing
that's finally clicked is this is like
is elon musk a genius and the answer is
probably yes but but
like
he's only as good as he is today because
someone documented their work you know
three years ago and that person before
was building on someone who built 10
years ago
right and it's like we we just
constantly are adding like one percent
increments on top of each other i think
that's especially true with code like
everything's just stacked on top of each
other so much that like it makes it
easier to innovate like i don't have to
if i want to make for instance you know
a new
data visualization library i don't have
to like start an assembly language with
the dna exactly and build up from the
scratch i can build on the other people
before me so you're you're adding to
society so so thank you
you're well societies you're welcome you
may praise me
with uh with like one cent per view
basically yeah exactly you're a medium
article so uh don't spend it all in one
place all right i don't
um
okay cool i think we covered projects
pretty well i did want to ask favorite
data tools what what you mentioned uh
react.js earlier
yeah that's that's one that i actually
don't see a ton of data people using
because we're kind of too bad at coding
to use but it's very powerful um new
software engineers kind of have a better
grasp on it i feel like but you you you
live and die by the react.js
uh the reacting s is like it's better
for um like web stuff right so like yep
so my stack i usually use is like um
what would it be i guess like yeah you
can
sql database mysql whatever or like if
you just need a file store like s3 or
whatever you need right to store data
and then usually i like to build like a
python like a flask api
which is there to basically either do
calculations or serve data and then the
front end is usually where i use like
the react because like yeah so like all
react is for those that don't know is
like if you ever looked at html code so
if you go into your browser right now
and you right click and you go inspect
element you're going to see a lot of
like
code it looks like and all it really is
is like um
it's like a structure and it tells you
like okay um this is the page and in
that page there's like 20 different
lines and in each line there's
like a bold letter or something like
this right so it's sort of just
structured and that's the browser takes
that code and then it sort of renders it
so it knows how to sort take the code
and make it visual right
and what you can do is you can just
write that html code out from scratch
but the problem is like it's there's a
lot of lines it's very verbose like it's
you can't read it's hard to reuse stuff
if you're doing it that way
so react.js is kind of like um
think of it as like a language or tool
that's built on top and the idea is that
you can write things a lot more cleanly
and then it builds it when you compile
it or you run your react code what it's
doing is it's spitting out just a normal
standard html website that you would
normally see but the idea is that
if you can reuse
things like for example like i don't
know if you go to like
like there's a button or whatever right
and you want the button to look like a
very specific way um if you're in html
you just gotta like copy paste that
button a million times right uh but
yeah and then you have to make sure all
like it floats to the left and it's this
wide or whatever but in reality it's the
same button so you would just want like
one
class or function that would define what
a button is and you just want to say
repeat it so that's kind of what
react.js can help you do so it helps you
build websites like a lot easier also
they have like packages and stuff so
like you really don't have to write any
code yourself which is like the most
important thing in programming is that
you should never be writing
code you should usually be copying and
pasting code for the most part and then
editing it
which is the way to go
but yeah for like data tools though like
ah the classic like you have numpy you
got data frames like all the python
stuff i've never used r but i hear good
things um you know and then i use matlab
a lot and matlab is
like one of those things that like
people use in university and then they
like never touch ever again which is
like basically what i did except when i
got my like job at the bank like we used
matlab and i realized matlab is more
more powerful than
people give it credit for for the most
part
um so we do a lot of like data
manipulation and like because you put
stuff into like matrices and all this
like mathy stuff so we do a lot like
mathy things there since useful for that
but python could do the same thing
honestly it's sort of
i was gonna ask though because that's
that matlab doesn't do production that
well correct or am i wrong
well
for the map a lot of people listening
i'm sorry but like so the matlab
actually does have a lab there's no
matlab people listening kyle there's no
honestly it's it's like literally me
that's the way my last person yeah yeah
i i did it i did a matlab conference and
like i showed some of the stuff i built
and it was just like the three people
were like that's wonderful i'm like
thank you greg tom and patricia it's
great um
yeah so like they do have actually like
production tools so they've been really
building out like the ability to have
like a production
api server or whatever but but again the
problem is like this is okay for like if
you're a company or whatever and you're
willing to pay like like tens of
thousands a year or whatever to have it
um they don't it's hard because like
matlab costs money and if you want to
get like the packages that are good for
like deployments and stuff it costs like
more money right so they make like
honestly the biggest critique of matlab
is like it costs money the upshot is
their support's like incredible you
email them and immediately they'll get
like oh our development team's on the
line like what do you need
okay you wanna like we have this new
update coming up here's an nda if you
sign it we'll give you all the all the
information so like they're really good
that way um but yeah it's sort of yeah
it's not as easy for production and to
be honest what we ended i ended up doing
was you can do something called
compiling matlab
so you can compile into like an exe like
an executable and then i i wrote my own
distributed computing network like
cluster amongst all machines that will
run
these like exes in parallel so instead
of having to um like host
these like production machines i just
have it so each machine has the
executable file and i made like it's
almost like a botnet that just like
executes the one i want to run stuff
right
which is a fun project but yeah yeah man
can can we contact uh matlab i think
they need to sponsor this episode i
think we already sponsored it for them
oh yeah
yeah we already said everything that uh
they wanted to hear so nice exactly
matlab if you're listening you can go
ahead and send me a paper
exactly and you can say i tried so hard
when i was in college to work for matlab
so hard tried so hard i love matlab in
college and yeah you never even know me
back so
you got to blame cleve mohler the the
creator of matlab so all right damn you
cleave yeah i'm not i'm mad at him um
okay sweet um the other thing uh that
was really interesting thanks for
mentioning your your favorite tools um
the other thing i just wanted to mention
um was what do you like to do outside of
uh outside of data
oh
what is outside of data is a real
question right oh data's everywhere yeah
that is true and you do a great job
your outside passions to somehow
technology programming and data i was
looking at your medium you had like a vr
thing that you did right oh yeah yeah
sure yeah so yeah so i like vr which is
cool like once i my brother one like
when he was visiting one day he brought
like an oculus quest like a year or two
ago
and like the oculus quest that people
don't know it's like well it's actually
right here
so if oculus you're listening hit me up
um well it's facebook or meta now but
anyways um
so like it was very cool so like i
bought one basically and i was like i
put it on i'm like this is like awesome
you can like move around and full like
you can go under tables you can lay down
on the ground it's like really really
cool and i'm like i want to make like a
puzzle game or something like this right
so
yeah like
yeah that kind of bled into like i made
like uh like just like it's like an
article like how to like make hands in
vr or whatever but really like vr is
super fun like me and my brother play
table tennis which is pretty good and
you know just chat he's in he's in
vancouver which is like on the other
side of the country so the ping is
pretty bad but it still works out um
yeah i also like like i do running and i
got into biking recently because it's
winter over here and like the winters
can be brutal so it could be like it
goes like today was like plus i can go
like plus eight to negative 30 in a few
days so it's hard to like
get out for a run or anything and then
it's also winter so like i don't like
exercising in winter so
you know doing some uh that kind of
exercise stuff
you're biking inside then honestly
yeah yeah so me and my buddies are like
trying to like there's an app called
zwift which is like you can like bike in
a virtual world together so like we're
really really embracing the metaverse at
this point you know
nice that's that's awesome um and you've
done projects on strava stuff and
running i remember
uh so yeah and i guess the other thing
that we talked about at the beginning
was like the escape room you thought
that was fun so why not
in a little box oh man
just tell me quickly about that because
i literally
i literally up here i'll show you guys
show me oh
up there i have uh like a bunch of like
arduino and raspberry pi stuff and one
of my business ideas was like can i make
an escape room based off of these inside
of like a van my god
oh my god you're speaking my language
let me tell you about the box now
if my wife is listening she's heard a
lot about this so she might want to tune
off because i'm gonna get real into it
here we go it's like yeah yeah yeah
exactly so like yeah so you have a
raspberry pi and like i was like oh like
this is cool i wasn't for a while i was
like really interested in like how
hardware worked like because like it's
not anything you really i would never
learn in school or whatever about like
hard work hardware seems cool like i
like solar panels maybe i can make the
solar panels do something that didn't
work whatever so it's fine but like i
got the raspberry pi and i was looking
at like components you can buy and like
raspberry pi if you don't know it's like
a tiny computer is like that big and
it's like 30 40 bucks or something like
that like to get the whole setup
including like like everything set up is
like 80 so it's like pretty cheap but
then you can buy like components for it
like sensors for like dollars like you
can get like a heat sensor or a light
sensor for like almost like next to
nothing and then you just have to learn
how to like put it together so in the
pursuit of that i was like how could i
make something really neat
so i ended up fabricating this box of
made of wood
and i actually on that raspberry pi i
made a um
i made like a flask i think it was like
yeah some sort of python like api and i
made a web page and it was only and i
also made it so
it that when you boot on the raspberry
pi it makes its own wi-fi network so
in order to get into the box there's
like a qr code so you have to unlock
something and then it exposes a wire
that you have to plug in and then it
boots up the raspberry pi and there's
like a hint of like go onto your own
phone's wi-fi and look for this new
network you connect to that network and
if you go to like localhost 3030 or
whatever there's like a custom website
that lives inside the box and then
there's like puzzles in there and i put
sensors in it so like you had to like
shake it to make the website update you
have to shake it three times and then it
would like do something like it would
start i would actually be transmitting a
radio signal from the raspberry pi so
you have to physically get a radio and
tune in then it had like morse code type
in a bunch of stuff oh man it was really
exciting and then i think i broke it
like i think i left it outside or
something like that and it got in the
rain
so prototype one died but from what i
hear from you
prototype 2 is on the way right yeah i
got i got a lot of the components you
got a lot further than i did so
so when are we forming the the company
and when can people purchase in your
nearest walmart uh the box llc
uh will be available in 2029. i know
it's a bit far out but the kickstarter
is beginning now it weighs 30 million
dollars we're not going to say where
yeah yeah yeah with every pre-order you
get an nft and that nft
say the same thing you get one
collectible
exactly yeah and then yeah and then you
can trade it in for you know nothing i
guess but
because the gas price will kill you
yeah you get the box now and the box nft
now and you have to burn the nfc oh yeah
or or you have to buy the box and then
if you solve it you get an nft saying i
completed the box but then you have to
burn the box you have to buy another box
right so and then i'm interested
it's a business model you've got to keep
it you know the the money turning so
it'll be good
that's true well this has been awesome
thank you so much kyle davis stuff plus
um super fun to get to your face because
you know i i think we've had quite a few
live people um that are probably a lot
of them from your instagram and you know
they don't necessarily see your face so
i'm sure i'm sure they had fun seeing
your face i know i had fun seeing your
face
um
i see heart floating those yeah lots of
hearts flowing uh those who are watching
on youtube like seeing your face and
those who are listening to the podcast
just uh didn't get to see your face so
but they get to listen to sweet sweet
voice oh yeah that's true so um okay so
where can people find more uh about you
and your work what are the best places
uh probably yeah dear stuff class like
honestly my medium stuff is like what
i'm like most proud of i guess i have a
link linkedin as well if you want to see
my professional career things
um
i have a tick tock i don't really post
on it much
um it's got like i posted one thing and
it got like pretty high but like there's
it's it's going to be the same thing as
the instagram account put it that way
but if you have tick tock and you like
tick tock you can look at that
and uh you know you can always message
me send me an email whatever
have any questions i'm always open you
know to help people out
but yeah
that's awesome we'll have your we'll
have your medium and your instagram
definitely in the show notes down below
and definitely give give both a follow
if you're not already following so um
yeah man thank you so much and uh thanks
for joining and we'll have you on
another show some other time that is
today's interview thank you so much kyle
for uh joining us and telling us about
data science projects and your data
experience that was really awesome thank
you for all those who are listening and
watching i'm really appreciated and if
you really found this podcast helpful i
would love if you left a rating and
review it helps other aspiring data
professionals to find this podcast and
also supports the podcast from happening
every week um i'll catch you guys in
future episodes and once again
definitely check out those show notes
down below to find kyle's medium as well
as his instagram as well as the free
data roadmap pdf and 21 days to data
challenge that is coming up soon peace
everyone have a good day

Title: Become a Data Scientist in 2022

Description: In this video, I wanted to recap the necessary ingredients to becoming a data scientist in 2022. I wanted to highlight the paths you can take, the technical skills you should learn, and also highlight how I think 2022 will be different. 


0:00 Intro 
0:39 What Is A Data Scientist?
1:31 4 Ways To Break Into Data
2:44 Data Scientist Requirements
3:20 Proving Your Skills
4:08 Finding An Opportunity 
5:12 What Should You Focus On Learning? 
7:05 How Will 2022 Be Different
8:45 My Data Scientist Story



I wanted to shout out @KenJee_ds and @SundasKhalid for their videos highlighting their thoughts on Data Science in 2022. Give those videos a watch! 

#DataScience #DataScientist #Analytics

Video Transcript:
honestly if you just focus on these 13
topics you'd be prepared to face
most data science problems hey guys i'm
avery and welcome back to my channel
where i talk about all things data
science and analytics today's video i
want to talk about what it takes to
become a data scientist in 2022
there's been some similar videos done in
the past but i'm hoping that i'll be
able to provide a unique perspective to
what's been said previously already if
you're new to my channel i just want to
say hello and thank you so much for
tuning in if you find this video useful
at all it would mean a lot to me if you
hit the subscribe button as many times
as you can just kidding please only
present once all right only once but
before we get into it let's get started
with a simple definition of what a data
scientist actually is as there's
actually a lot of different perspective
in this video i'll be considering a data
scientist to be someone who analyzes
data with the use of advanced statistics
and machine learning this definition is
juxtapazzo's juxtapositions juxtaposit
is next to the term data science which
simply means providing value with data
you don't have to be a data scientist to
do data science so let's put that aside
for the moment just for a second and
focus on what it takes to become a data
scientist in the past you need to have a
phd or a master's to become a data
scientist but that's changing really
quickly there are so many people
transitioning without any formal
training so many people taking boot
camps and so many people self-studying
and heck now there's even data science
undergraduate degrees so the field is
changing really rapidly moral of the
story is the field is changing and it
will be for the next couple years as of
right now i see four main ways to break
into data the first one is to get a
graduate degree with either a phd or a
master's the second one is to get an
undergraduate degree the third one is to
self-study and the fourth one is a
bootcamp slash course i'm going to
assume many of you don't want to get a
phd and many of you probably already
have a college undergrad degree and i
personally don't have a phd and my
undergraduate is actually in chemical
engineering so i won't be focusing on
those very much at all and instead i'll
be focusing on the others some of you
might be interested in the masters and
i'll cover my experience with the
masters in the next youtube video so hit
that subscribe button and bell right now
to be notified when it comes out i'll
cover my experience in getting a
master's in analytics from georgia tech
and how that experience was for me but
in this video i'm guessing that you're
more interested in the self-study and
the bootcamps or like a program that i
run called data career jumpstart but a
good piece of advice that my friend
sundusk khalid mentioned earlier in her
video released this year about how she
would relearn data science in the year
of 2022 is to make sure you understand
the possible career paths that is so
important data science has many
different fields and actually many
different sub roles so it's important to
chase those out and understand what you
can even do inside of the world of data
science inside of the dataverse but the
advice i'll give you today will work for
any general data science position so
let's get into that advice let's talk
requirements at the end of the day the
requirements for becoming a data
scientist are actually pretty similar
having a good knowledge of statistics
sql a programming language either python
or r and being able to create a machine
learning model those four things sql
python r and machine learning bam that's
it the four ingredients to becoming a
data scientist in 2022 stats sql python
r machine learning memorize it get it in
that brain and the truth you may or may
not want to hear is it doesn't matter
how you learn those things it's just a
matter of learning them that's it that
really is it i promise you okay except
for one big thing and that is you have
to be able to prove it you can't just
tell an employer hey i watched avery
smith's video and he said stats sql
python r and machine learning so i
studied those and i'm ready for my job
no it does not work like that you gotta
back it up not like back it up dancing
but you have to show proof how can you
back up your knowledge one way is
employers will have take-home
assignments or coding tests where you
can demonstrate your knowledge the other
way is you need to have a portfolio to
show off your work and to be honest
likely you'll need both of them to
combine together different industries
and different companies will emphasize
the interview or the portfolio more than
the other i personally think the
portfolio is more generally useful and
does a better job of highlighting your
capabilities but that's just me it
doesn't really matter what i think
unless i'm trying to hire you the other
thing to keep in mind is is where do i
find a job because even if you have
those skills and even if you can prove
it you still need to have someone listen
to you and give you a chance and that's
where some data science learning
platforms will fall short compared to
others or excel better than others for
instance i'm an individual i'm a human
and i have human connections i've
developed a lot of data connections over
the last few years so i try to help my
students get in touch with people who
can actually help them find really good
jobs in fact two of my students just
landed jobs in the past month that came
through some of my personal connections
networking is always king and it's
always best to try to get a referral or
at least some sort of human connection
when applying to for jobs of course you
can just apply jobs online kind of
blindly and that works sometimes to be
honest or you can create interesting
projects and share them on places like
kaggle and linkedin and hope it gets
noticed but nothing can really compete
with human connections so in deciding
where and how to learn to become a data
scientist think i need to learn stats i
need to learn a sql i need to learn
python r and machine learning and i need
to be able to back it up via coding
interviews and portfolios and i need a
connection for the job that is the magic
recipe for 2022. let's dive a little bit
deeper into what you actually need to
learn within stats sql python machine
learning i'll list a few topics within
each category to help you out first
stats i think you need to learn
descriptive statistics which is
basically can you describe a data set
using statistics min max distributions
those types of things two hypothesis
testing can you statistically prove
something to be true or false based on
the hypothesis three anova analysis of
variance being able to tell if something
is statistically different than
something else all right moving on to
sequel you need to know select star from
blank where that's the whole blueprint
of everything in sql you need to know
aggregator functions max count etc etc
and then you need to know case 1 which
is the more complicated queries for
python this is what i suggest learning
is pandas to learn how to manipulate and
store data seaborn to make beautiful
data visualizations and scikit learn to
train machine learning models inside of
python and lastly what machine learning
algorithms should we learn multivariate
linear regression is number one because
it's really simple and easy to predict
things two is k nearest neighbors to
classify things
three is k means clustering to do
unsupervised clustering and four is
decision slash regression trees just to
give you another algorithm that will do
classification and quantification with
the same algorithm pretty much so two
for one honestly if you just focus on
these 13 topics you'd be prepared to
face
most data science problems that you'll
face as a data scientist of course it
doesn't cover everything but it would be
an amazing start and honestly
do not learn more than these 13 things
before applying to a job the best way to
learn is on the job training anyways and
then you're getting paid to learn
instead of paying to learn that's why i
start with those 13 topics at data
career jumpstart which in my opinion is
the ultimate way to learn data science
but i'm obviously really biased but
truly i designed dcj in a way that i
thought made most sense to learn data
science now you might be asking well how
is 2022 different than years previous i
think one smaller companies will dip
their toes into analysis and automation
meaning a lot more smaller roles that
smaller companies will open up and
personally i like smaller companies so i
look forward to this trend i also think
proving your worth is more important
than ever and employers and recruiters
will really be attached to people who
have portfolios we live in an age where
you can reach thousands of people with
just one post it's never been easier to
show how cool you are to thousands of
people and trust me i think you're cool
okay you are cool imagine working 50
years ago how can you show someone your
work you either need to meet them in
person or send them a postcard and i'm
not about to go buy some stamps so use
the internet to show off your skills and
i also think analytics tools are
actually getting smarter no code machine
learning platforms are getting better
and better each day so your technical
and coding skills are actually maybe
becoming less important while things
like finding business value
communication and working with
shareholders is actually becoming more
important this is actually something
that many bootcamps and masters fail to
cover adequately they give you the tech
skills but they leave you high and dry
with no human slash communication skills
and that's another element that i try to
emphasize inside of data career
jumpstart in review you need stats sql
python r and machine learning skills to
become a data scientist and then it's a
matter of getting an opportunity and
networking referrals are best for that
and then to prove it by passing coding
tests or having an amazing portfolio and
that's it folks tech skills proof job
opportunity that's all you need hey if
you got any value out of this video and
want to see any of my future videos
please go ahead and subscribe i'll give
you one truth buck if you do and if you
didn't like this video just hit the
subscribe button anyways for my
self-esteem just kidding kind of just
kidding i don't know if i'm kidding or
not if you'd like to hear how i became a
data scientist i'm going to pop that
video up on the screen right there that
kind of goes through my data story
anyways thank you guys so much for
joining i really appreciate all of you
guys i'll see you in future videos and
as always stay data driven

Title: 20 Red Flags For a Tech Job

Description: In this episodes, I‚Äôll cover 20 red flags to check before taking a job in the tech industry üö©üö©üö©

Your job is half of your waking hours, so it‚Äôs important to understand what you‚Äôre getting into before accepting a job. Going through this simple checklist could save you a lot of headache down the road. Listen to hear some things to look out for.

Want me to answer one of your questions? Submit it on my Discord 

Want some help finding a tech job? Schedule a 1:1 call with me. 

SUBSCRIBE!
If you‚Äôre finding this podcast helpful, and want to help so others can listen, subscribe and leave a comment down below.

Video Transcript:
let's get into it 20 red flags for tech
jobs and honestly this could save you a
lot of pain
okay welcome back to the data career
podcast the number one data podcast in
the entire world please don't fact check
me but i'm pretty sure it is this is the
podcast that helps you grow your data
career and i'm your host avery smith i'm
so excited to have you guys back this is
going to be a really fun episode um and
i'm excited to get into it we're going
to go over red flags in the tech field
for a potential job but before we get
into it i want to say this all right
here's the deal we have 300 people that
listen to this podcast every single week
and you guys are awesome thank you so
much for listening but here's something
that's kind of sad the pod only has 16
ratings on apple and spotify so please
if you take five seconds right now leave
a rating and if you don't mind taking 10
extra seconds and leaving a review that
really helps the podcast and if you're
watching the podcast on youtube hi guys
on youtube uh that's a new thing that
i'm doing i'm gonna have every episode
be on youtube as well i'd love for a
subscription that would mean so much to
me so anyways let's get in today's
podcast we're gonna take on a question
that was asked in the data career
community discord okay so i do this
about once once a month where we have an
ask me anything session inside of the
discord so actually i'm doing the the
ask me anything later tonight at 7 00 pm
eastern time i'll be inside of the
discord answering questions that were
asked but i took one of these questions
that i really liked from ali and i'm
going to answer it on this podcast so
ally asks what are some red flags we
should keep an eye out for when we get
our first offer and i'm just going to
generalize this to any job offer what
are some red flags when you're looking
for a new job
this is important because a job is your
life
you're working a lot of the time you
know you're working 40 to maybe 60
hopefully not 60 maybe 30 to 60 hours
each week and that's like half of your
waking hours so you want to make sure
that you're really enjoying your job
that your job is fun that you're not
stressed that it's not like a negative
that it can be a positive in your life
okay so you want to be as educated as
you can be because this is a big
decision
so also this is also very timely because
a friend of mine zach wilson who's a
tech lead at airbnb posted some of their
red flags earlier this week and i
thought i'd read theirs and then also
add some of my own
but before we get into it i do want to
say this
no job is perfect every job has its
flaws and a job is better than no job
usually okay so if you have a choice
between a job and no job i would always
probably choose the job but there are
some jobs that are insanely toxic and a
terrible environment but usually it's
easier to find a new job when you
already have a job so a job is better
than no job and no job's going to be
perfect there's probably always going to
be at least a little bit of red flags
but we're going to go over at least you
can identify and know that those red
flags exist so let's get into it 20 red
flags for tech jobs and honestly this
could save you a lot of pain
all right
so
zack wilson on linkedin said these are
red flags about culture for me when
working a job all of which i've
experienced firsthand the first one that
he says is managers who don't take much
bto this is a big one for me because i
work to live i don't live to work pto is
really important to me and if your
manager doesn't value pto they're
probably always going to be mad at you
taking pto so you want to make sure your
manager likes pto that they encourage
you taking your pto and then they don't
discourage it because vacations are fun
you know pay time off is fun that's
that's where you live you know and so
you want to make sure you have a manager
that respects that two managers who
micromanage okay this is a big deal
because you want to have autonomy in
your job you don't want to be always
having someone looking over your
shoulder you want to be able to perform
yourself and do things yourself and if
you have a manager who doesn't really
respect that
it's going to be hard it's not going to
be very enjoyable three managers who
aren't open to feedback and this is huge
because we don't know anything we don't
know everything right and we're all just
learning we're all just trying our best
and so if you have a manager who thinks
they know everything
that's not going to be a fun place to be
so and your manager really dictates a
lot of of
you know your work when i was at exxon
it's a huge company right um and each
manager manages very differently and so
your experience at exxon from one group
to another varied very dramatically
based on who your manager was so
manager who isn't open to feedback is
not someone you want to be working for
okay three teammates who aren't willing
oh wait this is four sorry teammates who
aren't willing to learn
and this is so frustrating because
working as a team is so important in any
job especially in tech and you want to
be with people who you who you really
enjoy and if someone's not willing to to
learn that's really frustrating you know
this might be someone who's been at the
company a long time and maybe they
they've really established their you
know their spot in the company but
they're not really willing to learn new
technology or maybe you have someone
that's like brand new and they're like i
don't really want anyways it's just
frustrating to work with people who
don't want to learn all right five
teammates who aren't willing to teach
this is a big thing maybe there's like a
competitive environment they don't want
to help you they don't want to teach you
really frustrating all right i'm going
to stop doing the numbers because i'm
not gonna be able to remember what
number we're at uh but the next one is
non-on-call related pings after 5 30 pm
and this is another one i work to live i
don't live to work i want to be done
with work clock out and not have to
think about it for a little bit and so
if there's you know not important stuff
that's you know being sent to me after
hours i'm going to be pretty frustrated
and that's going to be a point of stress
and so for me i know that i wouldn't
really enjoy that all right next is
having to wear a toot a tie slash a suit
slash formal wear this is really
important especially in tech
it's so easy to just let people wear
what they want it's just so easy you
know maybe you have some guidelines but
like do they have to really be that
strict that was something that was so
frustrating for me at exxon is i had to
wear you know a button-up shirt every
day which is you know maybe not the most
formal but i just wanted to wear jeans
some days you know and that was another
thing at exxon you had to donate to the
united way to earn jeans to wear jeans
on fridays
and that was just
i know it's to a good cause but i feel
like i was buying the ability to wear
jeans and that i just felt like i didn't
have freedom so that was really
frustrating all right um we're going to
read the next one unrealistic sprint
planning and expectations so do they set
realistic expectations that's kind of
hard to judge until you're until you're
actually in the environment so kind of
hard to be able to you know foresee that
managers who aren't willing to
re-prioritize things after quarterly
planning this is obviously huge this
kind of goes back to managers who are
open to feedback you need to have
flexibility in your management
the next one is blame game when
production has an issue and this is huge
you know they like want to put people's
they want to put faults they want to
blame people and that's just annoying
you don't want to be in that that place
that's not a team that's building up
it's a team that's tearing down
um excessive status and check-in
meetings i just hate meetings in general
i think a lot of things can be done via
email or not even really done at all so
you don't want to be in a ton of
meetings all the time
credit being hoarded instead of shared
once again this kind of goes with the
blame game
that uh blame goes to someone and credit
goes to someone versus shared as a team
you always want to be in a team
environment where you're like your
co-workers your co-workers co-workers
and you are working well together and
you're accomplishing things together and
whether that fails together or succeeds
together you're doing it as a team and
you're trying your best all together
um the last one that zach mentioned is
too many ad hoc requests and this is big
in software development maybe not as big
and things like data science but like
things that have to be done like right
now today at this very moment those are
stressful um no one wants to have that
people don't really like deadlines in
general deadlines cause a lot of anxiety
and it's if you're gonna have a deadline
at least you could have it like a month
in advance or weeks in advance so you
can prepare for and actually accomplish
everything really well
so that's what zach said some of the red
flags are i totally agree with pretty
much all of these
they can be really frustrating and if
you if you get a job that has these you
might be really stressed and it might be
the job might not be a positive in your
life and like i said
a job such a big part of your life you
need it to really be a positive
so some other things that i added to
these uh i think 13 that zach mentioned
i have seven more to make a total of 20.
uh
you need a red flag is clear difference
in priorities do you have the same
priority as the company and i
experienced that at exxon because
i really wanted to make things i wanted
to innovate i wanted to create when i
think my
group and as exxon as a whole was less
interested in innovation and more
interested in execution and operations
and that's fine that's how they make
their money is they operate you know
with mass mass mass barrels of oil and
they make a penny on each you know
barrel of oil the in equals a penny out
they just do that a bajillion times and
that's how they make money um and a lot
of their innovation they kind of hire
out in my opinion so they just didn't
love innovation and i was really
passionate about innovation and so that
that for me should have been a red flag
that my priorities didn't match the
company's priorities
next one red flag to look for is a
company team structure
um you need to look at like how the the
organization structured and how that
would affect you you know is it a very
you know steep structure as in as in
like it's very deep and there is lots of
managers above you until you get to the
you know the ceo or whatever or is it
very broad where you know there's only
maybe like two layers between you and
the ceo that's just something to just
look at and see does that does that
match what i want it to you know very
deep structures are going to be very
bureaucratic
it's going to be kind of hard lots of
red tape probably versus more of a wide
structure you can kind of have a little
bit more freedom which i personally like
some people might like the deep
structure i personally like the broad
structure
next is a red flag is not encouraging
learning tech is all about learning
continual learning
no matter what job you have you know
whether it's software engineering or
data engineering or data scientist you
can never learn it all you can never
know everything
and so i love i think a green flag is a
company that encourages you to be
continually learning they might give you
some credits or some money to spend each
year for a learning budget
a company that does not do that i'd be
nervous about because it doesn't seem
like they care about you growing as an
employee so
big red flag if they do not encourage
learning
another red flag is they don't support
other aspects of your life this kind of
goes with like work-life balance um but
if they don't want you to have a side
hustle if they don't like that you you
know want to take off
early one day to go coach your your son
or daughter's t-ball right like if they
are not supporting you in other aspects
of your life they probably don't have
your best interest especially in today's
environment especially in tech where you
can work remotely um and asynchronously
it's kind of like what's the what's the
big deal
so that's a big red flag to me and i'm
actually going to add another red flag
right there that they they're not okay
with flexible working
so
at exxon
it's all up to your manager but one
thing that was really frustrating for me
was i had no ability to work remotely
really if i had like a fridge bring
delivered that day i could work from
home um but
if i wanted to work you know if i wanted
to go for instance see my family in utah
and i wanted to work remotely i had to
take at least one vacation day and they
forced me and i only had 10 vacation
days at exxon so that was really
frustrating so it doesn't support
work-life balance flexible working i
think is that is that one
the next red flag is that they don't
have a clear bonus salary structure so i
have a friend um she does not work in
tech
so this might be different in tech but i
mean this goes for any job and they have
a bonus structure
um and the bonus structure
is very unspecified like there is no
rules to what the bonuses are
and she sees her colleagues getting
bonuses that are way bigger than hers
and doesn't know why
um there's no rhyme or reason to what
the bonus structure is it's just like
the the manager says it's how much of a
team player you are
which is like how do you quantify that
you know and and so that's really
frustrating that is a big red flag that
there's no
infrastructure and i don't really like
bonuses in general because i feel like
there's a lack of infrastructure i have
a friend who works for shell so not a
tech company but their bonus is very
like laid out this is the formula this
is how you achieve it
and it's it's very like laid out but if
it's not laid out it's kind of just like
favoritism could leak in a lot and that
could lead to a lot of anxiety a lot of
stress a lot of extra worked hours you
know because you don't really know what
you need to do to reach that bonus so
that's that would be really frustrating
so that's a red flag for me
the next one is a closed off mentality
that is a red flag if this company
thinks it knows everything kind of like
going back to the manager knowing
everything and is is not you know
acceptable feedback if this company
doesn't go to conferences
if they you know aren't willing to learn
from other companies
if they don't like look for the outside
they do everything inside i would be
nervous i think that is a red flag i
think no company is good at everything
and the ability to learn from from
others who might know better is always
good
and the last one is the most important
in my mind a red flag is that the
company does not recognize employee
efforts and whether that's through a
bonus or some sort of employee of the
month system or just like
honestly getting respect i think is a
big thing and just like saying oh you
did a great job i think that's really
frustrating and that could be lead to a
lot of angst um and frustration for you
as an employee um so those are some red
flags that i see in the tech fields um
20 of them you can go through kind of as
a checklist and at least as an exercise
think about how these you know your
potential job or your current job you
know how how they would check these
boxes do they check any of these red
flocks these red flag boxes or do the
opposite and make them green flags that
that's fine too um yeah for those i
guess it's a little late in the podcast
to mention this but a red flag is like
an indicator that something might be
weird and a green flag would mean oh an
indicator something might be good
so before you go through any job take
any job think through this entire list
but like i said earlier no job is
perfect and i'm sure most jobs check one
of these red flags and it doesn't mean
that job's going to be a bad job it just
means you know there's give and takes
every job there's pros and cons so just
be a deductive and thinking through this
and i'm sure that you know you'll find a
good outcome for you in the end so thank
you so much for listening to 20 red
flags that could happen inside of the
tech industry
i hope you got some value out of this
podcast if you did like i said it really
helps the podcast if you subscribe and
leave a rating and a review whether
that's on spotify apple or on youtube we
have new episodes coming out every
monday so i'll see you guys next monday
and as always thank you so much for
listening bye

Title: 34: 2021 Review + 21 Days to Data Challenge

Description: Welcome to 2022! üéâ Thank you so much for watching & listening! In this episode, I review 2021, discuss goals, and introduce a new challenge!


New Data Career Podcast episodes EVERY Monday morning.
New YouTube videos EVERY Thursday morning.

Here‚Äôs what I did in 2021:
Quit my job
Snow Data Science
Consulted for 15 businesses
Ran 50 miles, 60k elevation = 11 peaks 
Ran a marathon
Sold a house, bought a house
Interned with the Utah Jazz
Graduated with masters from Georgia Tech 
20 days with youth group in Dominican Republic
Launched Data Career Jumpstart 

If you want to be updated when the next episode drops, just hit that subscribe button! BAM! 

#Data #DataScience #DataAnalytics

Video Transcript:
what is up everyone welcome back to the
data career podcast i'm your host avery
smith and welcome to 2022 can you guys
believe it we made it merry christmas
happy holidays and a happy new year to
each and every one of you
new year right very exciting times uh
i'm very excited i love the start of a
new year um so we're gonna be talking
about that a little bit today um what
does 2022 mean for me what does it mean
for data career jumpstart and more
importantly what does it mean for you
that's the topic of today's podcast so
first i want to start off by
recommitting myself to you guys thank
you so much if you're listening right
now
if you're listening thank you i really
appreciate each and every one of you and
it means a lot to me that you would take
time out of your day
to listen to my voice because you think
i have something good to say um that is
so humbling
and once again i'm i'm just so grateful
for that so thank you
in return i'm going to be even more
dedicated to you this year in 2022. um i
have a new podcast schedule coming out
okay and i'm really going to stick with
it and what that means for you guys is
i'm going to have a new episode in your
feed every single monday morning at 6am
eastern time you can count on it money
in the bank okay that is my commitment
to you guys is to have one new episode a
week every monday 6 a.m so you wake up
from your weekend you're ready to go to
work on that commute you can listen to
whatever podcast interview whatever i'm
doing it'll be available that monday
morning at 6 a.m okay that is my
commitment to you guys
and i'm really excited about it um so
hold me to it if there's not a new
episode on monday send me a message on
instagram send me a message on linkedin
say avery where's the new podcast
episode and i'm going to stick to that
schedule that is my commitment for 2022
i want to make 52 different podcasts
this year so keep me to it all right
okay let's hop into 2021 what a year
right like totally crazy
uh almost as crazy as 2022 or sorry
2020. they're all blending together now
another year with a ton of covid stuff
kind of sucky wish that would go away
but regardless 2021 was a huge year for
me it was a really big growing year a
really big learning year and i learned a
heck of a lot um one of my favorite
celebrities slash inspirational speakers
is a guy named jesse itzler
he's married to uh i almost said blake
lively but not
but not blake lively he's married to
sarah blakely um who's the creator of
spanx very successful couple um they own
part of the atlanta hawks
and jesse is all about building a life
resume he doesn't really believe in
traditional resumes he believes in life
resumes and i really like that i love
the idea of you know you put your
experiences on a piece of paper and
you're like wow i did do all these
things that's amazing and so i was
thinking what would my 2021 resume look
like if i were to write everything i did
this year everything that was important
to me
what would that be like what would that
resume actually look like so i have some
bullet points for you that i did this
year and i want to encourage you to
think about what would be on your 2021
life resume all right what did you do
this year that was impactful and
meaningful to you
so the first thing on top of the list
was i quit my job i quit my corporate
job in in 2021 and that was a huge deal
for me i was very scared to become an
entrepreneur
i was very drawn to it but i was very
worried about it and so that was a huge
thing in my life to all of a sudden
i'm in charge of making income there's
no one handing me a paycheck every week
and so that was a big thing the second
thing i did this year was start snow
data science and i consulted with a lot
of companies and that was a lot of fun
did a lot of really cool projects helped
a lot of businesses do automation do
analysis do machine learning do
dashboards i worked with people from all
over the world
and man did i learn a lot oh my gosh i
can't even tell you each one of the
projects was something like brand new
and i feel like i learned so much each
time i did it so that was another big
step for me this year
another one is i ran 500 miles
and that might not seem like a lot but
uh that's more than like 1.1 1.2 miles a
day and that was big for me i'm not the
biggest runner i'm becoming a bigger
runner um but that was that was huge for
me to do that um that also led to 60 000
feet of elevation gain which is
basically if you took everest mount
everest from sea level to the top did
that twice that's what i did in uh 2021
really puts everest into perspective huh
but that was like climbing 11 mountains
11 different mountains
to get the elevation it was it was a lot
of fun i ran my first marathon who would
have thought i never would have thought
i would have done my first marathon or
any marathon to be honest
i was not fast run is a very generous
word but i did it i can put that down on
my my resume my 2021 resume that i ran a
marathon and i'm proud of it you know
not that many people in their life run a
marathon and i did it
i bought or sold and then bought a house
as well
those were big landmark moments for me
and my family i entered with the utah
jazz that was this year can you freaking
believe it um so it was great to work
with the people at the jazz and really
fun and
oh i just thought it was really
fascinating and i loved basketball so
that was a great experience
i graduated my master's from georgia
tech like that was this year too
so now i have a graduate degree
um you know i'm
i'm a master i guess
um i don't think that i
that that degree necessarily
gives me a whole lot more than just my
experience but i'm really glad i have it
and i could always be on a resume so
that was one thing i did this year and
i'm really proud that i went to grad
school that's that's something that i
didn't think i'd ever do in my life and
look i did it
um i spent 20 days with a youth group
down in the dominican republic doing
service
man we built this house we helped build
this house it was kind of a whole summer
long project and sorry not even a house
it's a school it's a full-on school and
we tore the old school down we we
started to lay the foundation for this
new one
and what a humbling experience
something i'll always hold in my heart
and something that i'll always you know
look back and be glad that i did
it was an amazing experience and
i'll always remember the kids i was with
the people we served the environment
like it was such a different thing for
me and gosh i freaking loved it it was
so much fun
and then lastly i launched data career
jumpstart which is now this passion
project
of teaching people about data throughout
the world you know started the podcast
i've been making courses been put
pushing out a lot of content
and it's been so much fun i love doing
data career jumpstart it's awesome
so that brings me to you guys
what was on your 2021 bucket list what
did you do what was your resume and
what's going to what are you going to do
next year when you look back on 2022
and you're going to record a podcast
you're going to talk to me and you're
going to say
what did i do this year write those
things down now let's do them let's
let's get them on a piece of paper
which brings me to 2022.
new year new you right you hear that
cliche all the time uh it's a little
cheesy right but i actually love it i i
love new year new you i really love the
idea of fresh starts restarting starting
over and
my question to you is what's the new you
what is going to be different about 2022
you
um what is your goal you know you need
to have goals that you need to set now
that you need to remind yourself you
know three months in okay that was my
goal six months in that was my goal and
not only need to have you know goals
that are outcome oriented
but all of those goals need to have
subtasks right so you might have a goal
i want to lose 25 pounds that's what i
want to do i want to lose 25 pounds
and that's a great goal it's object
oriented or objective oriented sorry
object oriented is a programming term
but i really need to break it down to
daily tasks to achieve that goal so i'm
going to try to work out every day for
45 minutes
i'm going to try to avoid sugar
i'm going to you know run 600 miles this
year and bike 600 miles this year you
have the big goal and then you have the
sub goals that's what i've been trying
to do is set these kind of sub goals so
i can achieve my my bigger goals this
year
um i i encourage you guys to do the same
um and do do so in your career
take a little self audit right now think
where am i at my career do i like where
i'm at do i like going to work do i like
my job
do i like my my i almost call them
teammates but they are teammates my
co-workers my peers
are you bored
does your boss listen to you
do you want to break into tech think
about those things and if any of those
are true you need to break those up into
sub tasks you can't just say oh i want
to transfer my career to data
well that's awesome that's a great goal
but what are the sub tasks the sub goals
that are going to take you to that big
goal ultimately in the end
and i love that what habits are you
going to form that's going to allow your
life to transform
and that's why i'm really excited with
this new program that i'm starting in
january called 21 days to data the idea
is you're going to form habits that help
you learn and apply data
it's 21 days straight in a row so very
intensive but 21 days is the number of
days you need to form a habit and so the
whole the whole
point of this challenge is to get you to
form a habit of learning and applying
data
it's going to be like 15-minute lessons
15-minute mission 15-minute share so
it's about 45 minutes a night honestly
it'll probably be less it's probably
more on the range of 30 minutes a night
um and i'm so excited for it
i think so many people are going to you
know honestly
get the ball rolling and start changing
their lives with this with this
challenge because you everyone wants
that big goal i want to be a data
scientist i want to be a data analyst
you know i hate being a teacher i hate
being an engineer i'm not having any fun
at work i want to get paid more but you
need to break that up into sub goals and
so one of the best ways is to just do a
little bit every single day
right and that's what this 21 days to
date challenge is supposed to be is
you're going to learn a little bit about
data every day and do a little bit about
data every day and the combination of
that is going to make you you know form
this habit that's going to transform
your career and transform your life
um data's been such a catalyst for me to
be able to work remotely to earn more
and to actually just enjoy what i like
doing in my life and i want to share
that with others so this 21 days today
challenge it's going to start january
10th in 2022
um it's going to be super low cost i'm
trying to make it as inclusive as i
possibly can it's fifty dollars what
that what that gets you is 21 challenges
21 shares 21 lessons
out of the 21 lessons about half little
less than half are going to be live so
you'll have face-to-face contact with me
and the rest of them will be video
recordings
and you're going to meet like-minded
peers you're going to network
you're going to meet people that maybe
are you know could be your co-workers
that could help you know find you a job
eventually the network's going to be
really awesome and i'm just i'm just
really excited for the program i think
there's there's quite a bit of potential
to just you know it's a great start to
2022.
so that's what's been on my mind
recently i'm really excited about it i'm
really excited for 2022 i'm going to
have the
link to the 21 days to data challenge
down below in the show notes so please
please if you're thinking about you know
transforming the data or you really want
to make a big leap in the tech space
this year please consider just looking
at it just take a look at it and see oh
is this for me um i think it can really
make a big difference in a lot of
people's lives and i'm i'm really
excited about it
but once again thank you so much for
listening i appreciate each and every
one of you guys
uh and i'm committed i'm committed 52
podcasts this year i think we hit 33
last year
but it was off a very
very unbalanced uneven schedule and so i
think i've got a schedule where i'm
going to post once a week i think that's
sustainable for me um and what i want to
do and i think it actually helps you
guys consume the content on a you know
scheduled basis so monday mornings baby
put me in your calendar listen to the
data career podcast
if you're not already subscribed to this
podcast please please please subscribe
wherever you are spotify just came out
with a new subscribe button i think as
well as reviews so if you're listening
on spotify i would appreciate appreciate
appreciate a review and a follow or a
subscribe and hey if you're anywhere
else i would also appreciate it it
really helps the podcast and it helps
more people find this free resource
which they can use to hopefully improve
their life so i appreciate all of you
thank you so much for listening i'll be
back i will be back in a week from today
i will be back january 10th with a new
podcast so definitely stay tuned
appreciate appreciate all of you and and
talk later happy new year

Title: Data Management Definitions with George Firican

Description: Come join on another episode of the Data Career Podcast to learn about definitions within data management!

George Firican is an award winning data governance leader, the founder of lights on data, and the director of data governance and business intelligence at the university of british columbia. He‚Äôs a great resource for the data community and someone to follow on LinkedIn.

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery
smith what's up everyone welcome back to
another episode of the data career
podcast i'm super glad
to have you guys here and also very glad
to have an awesome guest for you guys
today we got george firikin from lights
on data george welcome to the data
career podcast thank you so much for
having me it's such a pleasure to be on
yeah i'm so glad to to have you here
it's been um it's been a while since
i've done a live show i think it's been
actually a month since i've done a live
show on linkedin so i'm glad that you're
the person that's here to to come you
know come back to linkedin live with me
so thank you for being willing to do
this oh i appreciate that and uh yeah
i'm a big fan of your show
hey a mia of yours too um for those who
don't know i got a little bio here uh
for george george furikin is an
award-winning data governance leader the
founder of lights on data and the
director of data governance and business
intelligence at the university of
british columbia he's a great resource
for the data community and someone
definitely to follow on linkedin youtube
and check out lights on data as well so
george is a great resource to know and
yeah excited to get some knowledge out
of him in the next hour
appreciate that
okay so george i want to start this is
how i typically start podcast is hearing
people's story about how they got into
data um because although it might be
like kind of a basic question everyone's
journey is so different
and they have a different story and i
was looking a little bit about yours i
mean you don't necessarily have what
people would consider maybe the
traditional background i mean you do you
have you have a cs degree right i do
yeah okay but then you got into web
development it looked like for a while i
did yeah i used to at one point i used
to develop wordpress sites and uh like
e-commerce sites back-end front-end
and that was fun
and then how and fast-forward today yeah
and then i kind of made a leap in more
in the business side so doing a bit of
business analysis project management so
trying to
i guess make the bridge between the
client
and the development side
so that gave me a nice perspective on to
you know the wants the needs versus how
things are being developed and try to
make that happen and i think it was
actually during that time when i
realized you know what data has a big
impact on everything
on the reports and then ultimately on
the decisions that customers need to
make based on the data that they gather
that they enter and i realize this is
very important so
how can we handle that better how can we
just bridge the gap between the two and
i realize there's a whole different
industry there just focus on data
management and data governance
and then you know i was surprised that
it was so much bigger than i thought and
so many more people had you know same
challenges that i was facing
so that really got me into this side of
data management and then well you know
the
business intelligence reporting as well
as i kind of think it really goes well
with it
okay so that's interesting so you you
know you're you're more technical but
then you maybe had some more business
oriented uh roles where you're kind of
like looking at reports um and doing
more of like high-level analysis maybe
less less technical work but then you
you realize there was like all these
issues with with the data is that right
is that what you said yeah and the
issues really came more from the people
side rather than the technology so it
was more in the communication more on
understanding more on convincing people
that okay let's get on the same page
here and
you know see what we mean
uh when people say you know i want the
kpis on the customer
well depending who you talk to even
though they're in the same company same
department they might actually mean
different things so that's one of the
issues that companies are facing i think
the uh when they talk about the verbiage
the business language they don't all
mean the same thing even though they
might think that they do
so there's all these assumptions going
on but i mean that's just one facet
there's so many other challenges and
there's a lot of politics in it so yeah
you know coming from a technical side
now i have to deal with more political
uh pieces i think and a lot of
communication a lot of change management
as well
so so that's actually that's actually
interesting um and we're gonna we're
gonna get more into this uh as the show
goes on um but like let's just take that
definition problem so like like for
instance where i guess where are you
calling from i don't even know where
you're stationed at
i'm in vancouver canada here on the west
coast okay vancouver canada and like for
instance i'm i'm in uh salt lake city
utah and so if like i say mountain
okay i just like use the term mountain
what does the word mountain mean to you
like
what would define a mountain for george
ooh there'll be something over a
thousand feet
something over a thousand feet okay and
that's interesting i might say it's
something over
like 3 000 feet like i think that's kind
of what you're talking about is like
your definition for mountain and my
definition for mountain might not be the
same and that could lead into a lot of
issues especially when it comes to like
you know communication and reporting
like
when in business you need to be very
clear about what actually you're talking
about like okay is a mountain 1000 feet
is is a you know a good sales day a
thousand sales or is it 3 000 sales
how do you like even prevent that like
how do you get people on the same
page oh man well you know it all starts
with an issue and then working backwards
to try and understand well why did the
issue occur and then one of the
root causes is this communication
problem
actually the calculation was done right
the data the right data was used
transformed exporting that report but
then you find out well
it's not what the client
wanted
it's what they said that they wanted but
that clarification wasn't made it was
kind of lost in the translation
so especially again if people have
different
different experiences working with the
same data maybe that developer worked
with a different client that asked for
the same thing
but clarified it in different ways
and then when you go to your second
client well you don't you don't go
and
confirm your assumption you just think
it's the same because i mean you work
first in company why why would it be
different the reality is it's different
in so many ways we just had a meeting uh
just a couple hours ago at work and this
is one of the things the same
business terms were used in this
dashboard but actually the owner of this
dashboard the client
meant completely different things than
what we had in our business glossary
so which was creating challenges of
course depending who was looking at it
through their own context through their
own assumptions they would then
interpret it differently and we don't
want that to happen we don't want any
interpretation especially when we have
you know clean good data let's take
advantage of it and
um output what should be out with it
so so you used a term there um called
business glossary
that's actually kind of a new term to me
um and i i kind of think i know what it
means but i'm not 100 sure and i think
you even have a course on this right i
do yeah okay yeah one of the courses
okay so i know you can't tell us all our
secrets but what is the basic of a
business glossary
so
to me it's it's this collection of
business terms and their unique
definitions and you know a bunch of
other related information so by the way
by business terms i don't mean you know
you agree to the terms and conditions
but it's again the the business verb
which is what is a customer what is uh
cost per click what is asap so even
acronyms that's very helpful i i have a
funny story about the sap by the way
um
which i'll tell you in a second so yeah
so the business cluster you think of it
is comprised of these business terms
you know this other
interesting information uh and useful
information which historian attributes
so again things like what is a what is a
synonym who's the data steward for it
what system does it belong to
who's the owner
last updated date like all this
maybe mundane things but it's worth a
recording for it's things that really
broaden or narrow the base terms meaning
okay and like where where is that store
like where where should people store
that type of thing because it does seem
useful but like how how do people store
it and how do you edit it and that type
of thing
i mean there are dedicated tools for it
you know oh really yeah especially in
the data governance space
sometimes they could be coupled with the
data dictionary and the data
dictionaries
it's sort of the
um the technical side of a business
cluster if you will it's this repository
of information about data that provides
a description of a data element
and it's metadata
it's you know it's telling us you know
how many characters does that feel have
what are the restrictions is a primary
key foreign key everything that a
developer would need to know in order to
use that information properly especially
if you're
ingesting that data or having to
transform extract
work with it in in
any way
um so it could be surface there as well
so sometimes there's linkages between a
business clustering a data dictionary
and a data dictionary also uh holds that
information in its own tool usually have
one data dictionary per database or
system
whereas with the business glossary
something more enterprise wide you kind
of just have one
for the entire enterprise
or they could both surface in a data
catalog
which is this again enterprise void
assets that's kind of providing that
single reference source for the location
of your data sets in an organization
it's kind of like your your amazon
shopping cart
of data sets that you know data
scientists data analysts bi developers
anybody could use within the
organization
and what's that one called sorry the
data catalog okay so there's a data
catalog which is kind of like the the
super one that has a lot of things a
business glossary lists like a business
term and what the accepted definition is
um but you also mentioned one other
thing i it was a data dictionary
data dictionary okay
specifications about a field in a
database basically
okay so data dictionary describes the
data you have a business glossary it
tells you the different terms and the
catalog's kind of a combination of the
two or is it yeah
yeah it could serve as a two but also
has other functionalities like you're as
a data scientist you could ask
permission
from the owners of that data set through
the data catalog to use it and then you
know there's part of a review process
again going to amazon
looking for a book
um even though there's millions of books
out there you pretty much find what
you're looking for
same with the data catalog in an
organization i see millions of rows
but if you're looking for customer data
we'll give you you know all these tables
contain customer data which one do you
want to use do you want to use five of
them okay we'll add them to your
shopping cart state of purpose
probably some sort of a privacy security
expert will go through it and say yeah
george should be allowed to use it
for that purpose so we're going to allow
him to check it out
and
and use it and then it comes with a
bunch of metadata it comes with
you know what's your data quality
factor and score level in there
who's the data steward that maybe i
could i want to contact to find the
context of how the data was collected
and how is it being used what
assumptions am i making that i could
confirm against that metadata and so a
lot of useful i think information
okay and i guess who are some players i
guess in the data catalog field does sap
have a product
they do yeah there's there's a
all the big players do okay like
informatica sap um but uh ibm
uh though there's some new newcomers on
on the field as well that they're worth
checking out for sure
okay interesting this is such an
interesting world because
you know having been
a data scientist at a really small
company with 10 people
uh we didn't have any of this okay i
mean
there was really not that many people
accessing the data and to be honest a
lot of companies even big ones and i
can't name them unfortunately but they
start with excel and some even have
excel spreadsheets where they're
recording all this information yeah it's
a more manual process it's more prone to
error
but they start with excel so
yeah if you're a smaller company
i don't think you need to wait for a
tool to start something yeah and you
know in so many ways it's better to
start with excel just so you can get
your process in order to see how how
should you be recording these things so
that when you do get the tool you know
how to configure you know how to best
use it for your own needs
yeah i mean that makes sense and
and yeah it's a great place it's a
starting place at least you're thinking
about it i'm trying to think at exxon
how this all worked one thing at exxon
that was really useful is we had a um
an acronym dictionary that was like on
our
on our internet and there was a lot of
acronyms so that was always good but
sometimes you get multiple definitions
for the same acronym so that was i know
yeah that was tough yeah i mentioned i
was going to tell you a story about the
scp that's right yeah so to me and i
think to a lot of people asap or asap
means as soon as possible right
oh yes i remember this in this one
meeting um this this happened to a
colleague of mine and they were like you
know their director manager at the time
he was just one week in in in the
company uh
and the manager is like okay you know
you gotta do this to me for me asap
so the guy thought okay it's as soon as
possible so you know
hack and slash a solution next day he
provides the solution to uh the director
and the director was just fuming it's
like i told you asap
which meant as simple
as possible oh wow so like you know what
i i would have rather you spend like a
week on it but have given me a more
simpler solution
than something that was just quick and
easy
but it does doesn't quite cut it it's
more complex
wow that's that's really interesting and
yeah you never know what those acronyms
do mean so you got to be careful
um it's it's also interesting just
because
it it seems so simple it's like
if you see an apple
we should just call it an apple right
but somehow we as humans i guess we make
it not asap we make it not as simple as
possible and i don't know why we do that
and what is it with the acronym anyways
like sometimes i feel like i'm working
at military institutions at least our
organization there are so many acronyms
all over and it feels like we we kind of
ran out of the three-letter acronyms
that seems to be the the preferred
number of letters for actions yeah and
kind of moving into the four now
yeah i don't know what's i guess we like
to make things shorter
yeah it is interesting though because
it's it's like
we yeah if you see an apple we should
call an apple but it's so hard because i
guess the things we're seeing is so much
more abstract um i'm working with a
client right now um and uh we like i'm
basically coming up with some metrics
calculating some metrics making some
scripts that that does some really
complicated queries and calculations and
outputs them a simple to understand you
know metric and right now i'm even
having a hard time with them sometimes
because
we don't really have an accepted name
for these metrics and so i might call it
like i'll just make something up i might
call it the
the the apple the the apple metric but
they might call it like the pair metric
and so i'll be talking to them and i'll
be like okay this is what's happening
with the apple metric and they're like
what's that and i have to like
explain in paragraphs
like uh like hey this is what it is like
and they're like oh you mean the
parametric and i'm like yeah sure but
it's it's just so hard because it seems
so simple but we're just not on the same
page sometimes when it comes to naming
yeah it's it's only natural and yeah
this definitely happens when you come
from a different industry or just a
different company but even within the
same company but a different department
oh there's differences a hundred percent
i mean so after i worked at a small
company i went to work for exxon mobil
which is like
one of the biggest companies in the
world right and we had this issue all
the time that in between you know
different divisions but i mean to be
honest the bigger problem we had at
exxon is we didn't know that data
existed sometimes
and if it did exist we didn't know where
it was necessarily so that seems like a
dumb problem to have too it's like you
spend all this time collecting and
cleaning and storing data
you don't make it accessible for people
is that is that part of data governance
as well
it should be yeah and it it's again it's
something that's
spread worldwide i think any
organization has this issue data is
being collected data's being created and
they're still being held in different
silos
and a department that might be needing
that data they don't even know it exists
and by the way this is where data
catalog can help as well because
one of the features that it has
kind of crawls through all the different
databases and indexes their location and
um you know some smart ones could use ai
machine learning to kind of determine
the metadata associated with it so it
will give you some context as well
interesting very cool i did see we had a
comment here um from jose jose i think
was talking we were talking about
acronyms isn't it easier just to speak
complete words
i don't know we're starting to use
emojis now right so some people are
saying we're going back to the
hieroglyphs
i kind of like that what if we what if
we name our metrics on our dashboards
it's just emojis like oh yeah the smiley
face metric or something like that
right i'm i'm very guilty of like
calling like
using a sentence like
the like the amount of customers that
entered the store
to
like the thing the number of purchases
they made like that's sometimes what my
default is is like not to use a metric
name and like almost default to the
equation but that can get kind of
complicated too so i guess that's why
it's easier sometimes to have an acronym
for that because that's like a mouthful
i don't know
yeah i guess so but but then always put
some sort of a legend or some sort of uh
yeah glossary at the bottom or something
um yeah okay
let's let's go back to so we kind of
talked about you know
we covered business glossary data
dictionary data catalog um and this is
all part of of data governance um
and that's something that i think a term
that is new to me
so what what's your definition of data
governance
yeah to me it's a discipline that
provides
the necessary policies processes
standards roles and responsibilities
that are really needed to ensure that
data is managed as an asset
okay and how does it differ from data
management because you use that word
manage in the definition so is data
management the same as data governance
so here
so this one student of mine actually
gave this great analogy which i'm going
to use his name is reinier i think he's
from netherlands
and he you know the way he sees it and i
completely agree is that data management
is sort of the game
if we take a sports analogy
and you know so the game the activities
and data governance are basically the
game rules
or if we take a cooking analogy data
governance represents that recipe
and data management is the actual
cooking
of the meal
okay
okay makes sense yeah so it's like
they're they're very connected and in
order to achieve one you kind of do the
other type of thing yeah there are like
two sides of the coin and data
management from a dmr perspective so
dema stands for the data management
association international
they have this book of knowledge on data
management and to them data management
is
they're they're defining it as the the
business function for
um planning
controlling and delivering data and
information assets
and data management is comprised of 11
knowledge areas or components
and data data governance is one of them
you know the others are business
intelligence they are warehousing data
security
data quality
and and and a few others
so data governance is one of them but
you can't really have one without the
other either
you need to have those policies in place
right you need to have those processes
those standards you need to understand
well who's doing who
like in the kitchen right you you need
to understand well who's the cook who's
the main cook who's the sous chef
otherwise you know they might be
doing the wrong things or doing the same
thing at the same time and
not working very efficient
if you don't know where all your spices
are and if they're not labeled
and you know how much of cayenne pepper
you should put on into that dish then
you might end up with with something not
very tasty
that's that's actually really
interesting because um
so on the data career podcast we kind of
have you know people on from different
parts of the data industry and you know
most of what i cover
is is quite a bit i mean of course it's
it's definitely touched by data
management and data governance but i do
more i guess in that in that case
business intelligence or whatever like i
do more like insights you know once the
data is clean stored you know prepared
what what type of insight can we pull
out of it so i'm more of the the back
side of that i guess um and that's
typically who we have on the show but
we've had we've had scott taylor on the
show before and he's he's also in the
data governance page and he also used a
cooking analogy um so i guess i guess
data governance and cooking are just
their bffs they go well together
i guess so yeah i guess so i guess we
could use cooking making cocktails
and i've heard a lot of interesting
analogies
yeah it's it's it's really interesting
but the idea is you have to you know you
got to have good ingredients
you got to have good recipes in order
for good things to happen you know in
order for food to taste good and that's
kind of the same with data if you ever
want to pull any inside out you have to
have good structures you have to be able
to know where your ingredients are have
quality ingredients and
that's what goes into making a good pie
you know you can't enjoy the goodness of
a pie without the maybe less flashy
the less interesting the less
action-packed you know
parts of buying the ingredients and
storing the ingredients absolutely
absolutely and by the way like another
another uh piece uh to this whole thing
is that data governance committee
which i think it's very important to
mention
yeah a committee or council or a
decision making group they're like that
highest level executive
group that makes decisions on
what should the organization focus their
data
efforts on
and not maybe not necessarily from a
data science bi point of view but more
on okay what what foundations do we need
to put in place so that bi so that data
science teams
could function better
so
they're representing the business
and because you can focus on so many
things even if you just take a look at
the business glossary versus data
catalog versus the addiction well which
one do you tackle first if you tackle
all of them at the same time still what
business terms should you start defining
first what are the people that should be
involved i mean even just this which is
a very small scope of data governance
uh it's a lot of effort so this data
governance group committee council
whatever we want to call it
basically it's representing the business
so that's where we have
sort of the vps of each department or
business function
um
come in and and vote and say you know
what we should focus our efforts on this
for the next month
yeah i think i think that's true and
there's such a big gap between data and
the business sometimes that you know it
can be like
an entire person's job to link the two
it could be multiple people's jobs it
could be this council's you know
responsibility um and it's data's so
valuable that it's worth you know
investing in that to make sure that
connection's strong um and that actually
brings me into my next point you have
this on your website as well as you said
already once in the podcast this phrase
treat data as an asset
what do you mean by that
oh man yeah
yeah i use that a lot don't i
yes i like it i like it it's catchy and
i and i think i think it makes sense but
uh i want to hear it straight from
straight from george what does that mean
yeah so well first of all an asset to me
it's something valuable it's something
that's useful right it's really anything
that can be used to produce
that positive
uh positive value
right
yeah um
like from a finance perspective assets
is representing value of ownership that
can be converted into cash
and for the most part
data doesn't really appear on the ledger
of of
you know accounting ledger
it doesn't appear on the books
and if it does it's more of a liability
they're more equating it to well how
much does it cost is it costing us to
store this data to manage it to maintain
it
but
i think only in the past few i don't
know five years or or more more
companies have gotten on board to
understand data is an asset
same as our physical assets are
same as our people are as employees
which arguably they're the most
important asset that an organization has
and
let's let's try and equate its value by
what's the potential of
using this data to bring us something
positive
the you know the amazon cto um what was
his name uh werner
werner vogels
he said that data really the core of
value creation
and in his own words he also mentioned
that physical assets are kind of losing
their significance in in business models
so i think we're slowly starting to see
this this shift and a lot of people and
companies are saying yeah we do treat
data as an asset
but then they're not really
investing into it they're not really
managing it they don't have a program
data governance program in place they
don't have a data management in place
um
when they're saying yeah we went on 3d
as an asset they're maybe more referring
to let's let's start and apply ai
somehow
or you know analyze it without managing
it it's hard
yeah that's that's actually really
interesting i like the idea of
if data is an asset you know why is it
on why isn't it on our balance sheet you
know why isn't it listed
as you know it could be appreciating it
could be getting you know more useful
with time it could be getting more
valuable with time
um
and i i like sometimes so with uh my
analytics firm snow data science we end
up doing a lot of
uh
a lot of consulting work for smaller
companies a lot of the time um you know
companies that are maybe just getting
started you know mid-level companies um
and a lot of the time they actually will
will come to me and they're like hey
i
they they almost describe it as if they
are like they bought their grandma and
grandpa's house in you know west texas
and they're like hey i'm sitting on a
big oil well they're like i'm sitting on
all this data i don't even know what to
do with it and that's actually kind of
an interesting phrase because they they
know it potentially has worth they see
it potentially as an asset um but but
maybe also they've been like you kind of
said they haven't been taking care of it
it's been neglected a little bit so you
got to kind of whip it in shape and you
know turn it into something that that
actually is useful which which is really
you know all this data management and
data governance that we've been talking
about so if you want to treat data as an
asset you need to have data governance
true
absolutely
yeah i got to put that on a t-shirt
sweet i i like it
it is interesting though because
no one
okay not no one but less people like
let's take the oil filled example you
know um more people are like interested
in seeing oil come out of the ground and
then selling the oil
uh then
prepping the oil well
hmm
like like i feel like like let's say
there's i don't know some movie
about this guy who becomes rich
off of finding oil in their backyard
right i i feel like the more interest
like the climax of the movie is going to
be like when the oil first like comes
out of the ground and like you can sell
it or something like that not like not
like the months before of like setting
up your infrastructure and like getting
the machines all prepped and i don't
know those types of things so i often
feel like data governance kind of
is overlooked because it's not as sexy
as you know ai and machine learning
right yeah yeah it's not yeah it's not
but by the way i don't know if you know
the story of the you know the d is the
new oil phrase
no i don't i don't i want to hear it but
you should also put data governance is
sexy on a t-shirt too just just just
think but go ahead i want to hear the
data is the new oil let's hear it which
by the way it's controversial and i
understand why it's yeah you know
we we can't it doesn't really equate
but that's besides the point but i think
after i explained the story i think we
can see why uh this this phrase came to
be
so clive hamby he was well he still is
this mathematician that was hired by
tesco tesco is this like supermarket in
the uk kind of like safeway walmart
and uh he was basically hired to do
something with their tesco membership
and the membership is like every time as
a customer you're scanning that
membership when you're checking out it
was recording data about yourself
you know what have you purchased
and they hired uh clive to to kind of
see you know can you
do anything with this data and can you
help us develop a new a better uh points
reward system
and he did like him and his wife they
you know analyzed a bunch of data and by
the way they became millionaires because
of this deal um and as they were like
analyzing this data and finding
different patterns and different ways of
segmenting it and trying to see you know
how they could incentivize uh their
customers to purchase more and
give them deals that will be more
personalized based on their shopping
patterns and all that he realized that
it's as if he struck oil
so you know hence the data is the new
oil type of a thing
though
really all he meant he i don't think he
really wanted to equate it like oh yeah
data is exactly like oil but it's
important and it's valuable
the same way that oil is and that oh you
know data and similar to oil it's
fueling now a new economy
yeah that's that's very interesting
it's it's very powerful i i
i like the analogy i like the story and
it's you know it's crazy that they were
you know had they not talked to this
person this clive or whatever their name
was um
they may not have ever found they could
have been sitting on the oil they would
have never known you know i know
yeah that that's crazy that goes to show
i guess the roi on an or i guess yeah
the return on investment can be can be
pretty big sometimes
um
we have robert here watching robert
robinson how you doing robert
um he also said nobody wants the labor
pains they just want the baby that was
that was his takeaway
and i mean yeah that's another way to
put it no one wants to give birth but
everyone wants the baby i guess
um okay well this that's good i think i
think you can throw that on a t-shirt
too that uh data governance is labor ai
is the baby or something like that
um well that's good i think you're doing
you're doing god's work out there doing
data governance and teaching people
about it because it doesn't doesn't have
the shine that ml does but ml wouldn't
have the shine without it right like we
just talked about like all that
intelligence all that money that was
made does not come without having
organized you know data management um i
think so i think so
hey i i think so too i think it's really
important i mean
i know things at exxon could have gone
smoother uh with a little bit more
uh structured data management that's for
sure and maybe it was and i'm just i
wasn't aware um
but it wasn't it wasn't
that's a good point that's a good point
if if that's that's yeah if you're if
you're people that are in the trenches
doing the techno technical work i guess
have you know complaints
then yeah something might be
going wrong
yeah okay that's sweet um
i think i think that's mostly what i
wanted to talk about we talked about how
you got into data we talked about yeah
the definition of data governance data
management business glossary data
dictionary true data as asset now i
wanted to switch gears a little bit
because the podcast name i i was pretty
deliberate with this uh data career
podcast so it's it's a lot about data
but it's also a little bit about careers
um and you've obviously had a cool
career you do lights on data you have
youtube you have some courses um you
know you're at the university of british
columbia
why do you post on linkedin
ah
yeah great question
you know and
i wasn't posting years ago i think i've
only started when the pandemic started
actually that's when i became a little
bit more active
but it was
to give back
especially when i when i started my
journey in data governance data
management there wasn't a lot of content
out there and
sure the internet was not at the same
level
of saturation that it is right now there
was not so much information but even so
through the books and everything courses
that i took
i found that it wasn't maybe as
practical as i wanted to be
so based on my learnings based on the
things that i've experienced and created
myself i wanted to start sharing
my own lessons learn my own best
practices and see you know let's put it
out there and see if it's helping
anybody especially because i i do work
in the uh education sector
uh which
um it's you know non-profit at least
here uh where i'm working so they don't
have as much funding and similar to to
other organizations like government type
organizations maybe some healthcare in
different countries too where they're
not as funded as the uh private sector
i thought let me try and put some
information out there some of the
articles that i wrote some of the
templates that i've created
uh videos to again bring the importance
of data management data governance to to
the masses
and um at the same time it was also
motivating me to keep on learning things
or try to explain it better for myself
and then to others so
yeah it was a self-serving but also
trying to help people out and
it was great because then i met people
like like yourself and like scott taylor
and
you know being part of this data
community really broadened my horizons
even more
but yeah that was the reason yeah just
to um
help others other people learn and
me learning in the process as well
well that's very noble of you to want to
give back and it is cool that the
um data community actually has like a
community associated with it um my
background is originally in chemical
engineering and i felt like
chemical engineering kind of lacked a
community there wasn't many like forums
active forums there wasn't much like
content i guess online to digest and i
hope that's changing i know i have a
couple friends trying to try to make
that change but the data community does
have a lot you know and it's it is
really useful it is really open source
and so it's very cool that you're giving
back um because obviously you know i've
been given so much so i think i think
that's really cool
and another thing well thank you
um i think another thing that that you
said that was really interesting was you
do it
to
help
yourself
learn a little bit better i think is
what you said and maybe i maybe i am not
feeling that the right way and here
here's why i think in order to explain
things properly to somebody
or it's it's only at that point when you
try and see well you know what maybe i
don't understand it very well myself so
let me go back to this and and study
some more or
research some more and see how can i
explain it
so well that it's understood
understandable from the first try
so especially when i'm creating the
videos i'm putting a lot of hours into
it because i'm sort of revising the
message and
finding new ways of how i could explain
uh maybe a concept that seems simple
initially but then when i'm putting into
words doesn't seem as simple
yeah and i think that's so powerful um
you know we have um
i have my students inside of data career
jumpstart and we talk once again very
very intentional on the name data career
so it's also very career oriented and i
try i try to preach a lot about posting
on linkedin and a lot of them you know
will push back and they'll say well i
don't know that much about data you know
i'm like that's the perfect chance to
post on linkedin because
when you're posting on linkedin and when
you're teaching others is when you're
actually learning the most um and so it
might feel might feel s you know kind of
scary kind of crazy but you know posting
on linkedin is a great way to help
others great way to teach others and
it's a great way to cement your learning
um and i often think that
you know let's go back to you know the
movie analogy um like let's let's go to
like batman or some superhero movie the
origin story of like where batman came
to be is very interesting versus just
watching batman you know punch dudes in
the face i think i think we as humans
like to see progress we like to see
people learn and so sometimes people are
like oh i'm going to post when i'm at
you know when i've learned something
when i've you know i've gone from the
bottom and now i'm here
well i think the most interesting part
is actually probably the progression you
know
i think people miss on that and so i
think it's really cool that you're like
i post to teach others but also to learn
myself
yeah and something for your students i
think uh they really undervalue
what
positive gain others would get from from
them sharing their experience i mean so
many people are still at the stage that
they're learning the print hello world
yeah um right so
yeah share that because there will be
people that are at that level that want
to learn yes
from you
and from
what you're experiencing and what you're
learning and
absolutely you're 100 right i um a year
ago i shared a kind of experiment i did
with predicting the stock market with
python um and a lot of people were
really interested in it right and they
wanted to learn about it but a lot of
them didn't know how to use python you
know and so it's like a lot of the
content that i make you know a lot of
these things that i share sometimes when
it comes to like coding you know it's
taken me a couple years to get to the
level i'm at
and it's hard to
share with that with others sometimes
because they're like you know five or
six levels below not not
they're just newer to her right and so
sometimes when you're new to it you just
want to see new stuff and stuff that you
can replicate really easily so that
that's a great point it's people
sometimes think on a scale of 1 to 10
you have to be a 10 like in your space
to like share about it but the truth is
you only have to be one step ahead one
point ahead of the next person below you
right like like you could be for
instance a four like when it comes to
like python
but you can still post about python
because there's people who are you know
one two and three who are below you who
want who want information so i thank you
for bringing that up i really appreciate
that
absolutely and that exercise that i
mentioned that's part of your course as
well right that's one of the um
exercises that that's part of your
course i need i need to make it
well yes it is it is yeah so that's
that's it i had i had it free for
about a year um and now it's it's sucked
into data crew jumpstart the version two
so we do a lot a lot more with it um
yeah it's fun it's it's a fun little
exercise i'm not retiring off of my
stockbot but it's it's fun fun to mess
around um but that's pretty much what i
want to talk to you about today i think
we learned a lot about data governance i
know i did um where can people find you
george where's the best place that
people can find you and more of your
content
well please check me out on linkedin get
in touch with me and check out lights on
data.com and it's youtube channel
but lightsunday.com linkedin and you'll
find me uh
yeah sweet that's awesome and also just
for those who who are in data crew
jumpstart uh george was nice enough we
have a uh i think a coupon for his
courses so he has a course on let's see
if i can remember them all i know
there's one on data storytelling right
yeah data visualization
data storytelling
business data governance one on business
glossary correct yeah and one on data
governance maturity models
so you can find those on lights on data
dot com or you can if you're in data
career jumpstart we have a discount
section where we have we have a coupon
so if you guys want to check it out
definitely check it out i think there's
a lot to learn i think i can learn a lot
from taking one of these courses because
i'm not the uh the most well-versed in
data governance so i i talk to people
like george and rely on george to
teach me these things so anything else
you want to say on the way out george
well i think you're doing an amazing job
with uh the data three year podcast so
thanks so much for having me on and um
you know putting the knowledge out there
for people to learn from thanks george i
really appreciate it so definitely
recommend everyone connecting with
george and george thank you so much for
for joining this really appreciate it
and uh we'll catch you on linkedin soon
i'm sure thank you as well avery bye all
right

Title: MY TOP 10 TIPS FOR BREAKING INTO DATA SCIENCE

Description: After 6 years of breaking into data science, these are my ultimate ten tips to help you fast-track your way to a data career.

In this training, I'll give you my top ten tips for breaking into data science. I'll also give you a preview into my course, Data Career Jumpstart. Where I help you learn the career and technical skills needed to land an amazing data job!

I'll also be giving an exclusive discount on my course and bonus at the end of the training.

Video Transcript:
to
[Music]
do
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
blue
[Music]
do
[Music]
[Applause]
do
[Music]
[Music]
so
[Music]
[Music]
so
[Music]
so
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
do
[Music]
do
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
foreign
[Music]
you
[Music]
all right everyone just doing a quick
mic check if you guys can hear me let me
know in the comments
say hello let me know that you're
watching um but just just trying to make
sure you guys can hear me and i'm loud
and clear can you guys hear me let me
know
[Music]
okay perfect thanks for letting me know
that you can hear me as you can see in
the countdown right here oh wait where'd
you go right there we're gonna go live
in just a couple minutes um but thank
you guys so much for joining me here i'm
so excited to have all of you guys here
thank you for you know wanting to learn
about data science i'm super excited for
this master class we're going to go
ahead and get started about four minutes
but while you're waiting if you didn't
see i'd love to know who is here and
where you're watching from so go ahead
and let me know where you're watching
from in the comments i've already seen a
lot of you we got some really fun people
we got uh
oh man i need to make my screen bigger
so i can read we got mob from the uk
welcome mob
we got albert albert how you doing all
the way from north carolina marcus from
malaysia man malaysia seems like such a
cool place
let's see let's see who else we got here
monica from new york
peter from denver welcome guys
tyler from wisconsin
this is awesome so cool to see all you
guys around the world we got william
from london
that's very cool
we got um let's see who else is here who
else is here
we got magellan here from wisconsin we
yeah we already got the go bucks going
on
um lots of fun people here mitchell
mitchell so glad to see you i know uh
you had some uh power issues earlier
today so um
so glad that you are here
uh we've had some crazy weather in utah
uh mitchell's also from utah and it's
been so insane in utah we've had these
huge thunderstorms and you might hear
some of the thunder later because it is
so loud
um we got shabam here from india how's
it going
good to see you we have ollie from texas
um we got basir i saw this here here
from qatar
um smh from london jasmine from we've
got a good london representation going
on here
um i'm just gonna pull out uh the
webinar here on my phone just to make
sure that i can see all you guys too let
me pull that up
we're gonna get started in three minutes
um we're gonna go ahead and uh
run a quick hole okay um my team i have
my team in here in the comments they're
helping me go through some of the
comments um
so just if you if you see me not typing
that's because i had my team helping me
as well
ron ron wants the rain down here in
colorado i know it's been crazy we
utah and colorado have had some pretty
big droughts so it's good for us to have
some rain
um but we're gonna go ahead and do a
poll um so mike if you've got a poll
ready that would be great we're gonna do
how old are you i just want to know like
you guys are here how old are you guys
just while we're getting ready we we
have about 40 people watching right now
and um we have 40 people watching right
now i think something like
400 people signed up to come
um so we'll see if that flood comes in
around 10. um people get busy though you
know the day of so
um it's hard to uh
it's hard you never know what's gonna
happen so we got some numbers coming in
we got lots of 20 year olds looks like
we got 45
21.
let's see
64 and counting i love it
35 28. hey tyler just turned 23
yesterday congratulations
um
and i love this 64 and counting i love
that you're never too old to learn data
is such an awesome place to be such a
good i love it that's so cool
30.
okay we got lots of uh
lots of young people here lots of 30
year olds lots of 20 year olds
we got uh minoge here how's it going
manoj good to see you
ron's made a variable here he's got age
equals 21 plus 21.
so that's great
so we'll give it a couple more minutes
just or not even minutes maybe seconds
before we get started um just let
everyone kind of come in you know
there's gonna be some stragglers you
guys are all early thank you guys so
much for uh for being early i appreciate
all of you guys you guys are here you
guys got your seat
you guys are you guys know it's serious
business we just said 10 a.m in utah
which is noon eastern so we'll go ahead
and get started right away because we
got an action-packed amount to talk
about today i'm super excited to have
all you guys here um and listening so we
won't waste any of your guys's time
hopefully these people that are these
kind of stragglers um
you know
they'll come in here in a second but
we'll go ahead and get started thank you
guys so much for joining i'm so excited
to have each and every one of you guys
here i've been so excited for this for
about half a year um i have been working
on this and i hopefully have something
that's going to help you out in quite a
bit
so
um what we're gonna do today is we're
gonna do i mean let me turn off these uh
music if it's still flying i can't hear
it um but let me just give you a quick
little overview about what we're gonna
do today okay we're gonna have a really
fun session basically centered around my
top 10 secrets to break into data
science that's hopefully going to help
you guys land a career in data okay that
is my goal through this webinar so we're
going to go through a little bit about
my data story the hard part of breaking
into data science 10 tips to break into
data uh and a special launch pricing and
bonus for my new course data career
jumpstart which is launching today um
but before we get into the the class um
what are you guys most excited to learn
from data career jumpstarter i'm gonna
throw that in the chat we're gonna try
to get a poll up here it's hard for me
to see the polls that they actually work
but i'm gonna go ahead what are you guys
most excited to learn today and you i'll
give you four little choices right here
and if we get our poll guy to get the
pull up like i said i have a hard time
seeing the pull but here here are some
four different things that you can
choose from career hacks technical data
skills how to build a portfolio personal
branding
what what are you guys excited to learn
about today go ahead and
let me know i'm gonna pull that question
up on the page right here and like i
said i hopefully there's a pull but i
can't see the pull so um hopefully there
we go there
um oh we also have another poll right
now is what is your current role so
maybe we'll roll with that one what is
your current role go ahead and vote we
have engineer business finance science
i.t
go ahead and let me know uh what your
role is okay option five students
we got iguardo here is excite or sorry
wardo build portfolio building github
very nice i like it
amina says being able to apply these
skills to my current engineering role
and william was about to say where's the
student option yeah sorry guys i didn't
realize that there'd be so many students
here
um i can't see the results of this poll
actually so
hopefully you guys can um but either way
i hope you're really excited ted says
here to build a portfolio that's what
we're going to cover today so thank you
guys all 70 of you guys for being here
excited to have you so a little bit
about the special lunch and bonus this
is my course data career jumpstart which
we're going to go over i usually sell it
for about 2 000
but today you're gonna be really
pleasantly
surprised with the price and i'm gonna
actually be giving a bonus to the first
25 people who sign up but this isn't one
of those webinars where i'm just gonna
talk about my new course okay we're just
gonna talk about the end so even if
you're not interested this this this
training this webinar is going to be
useful for you okay so i promise if you
stick around to the end you'll be stoked
about the price and also there's going
to be a bonus gift for the first 25
people to join okay and then while those
first 25 people are getting signed up
we're gonna do a live q a session so we
can tackle any questions or any doubts
that you have
okay so the first thing we're going to
do actually though is a giveaway okay
all you need to do is type yes in the
comments i got these stickers right here
i got six rule data rule the world
stickers data career jumpstart very
specific unique stickers i made these
myself if you want one of these one of
these six i will send them to you in the
mail all you need to do is type yes in
the comments so go ahead and type that
really fast type yes uh in the comments
and i'm just going to choose some random
people eduardo i'm going to send you
some stickers well i'm going to send you
some stickers and hey just send me a
message on linkedin after this okay
that's how i'll get your address and all
the stuff like that so let's see oh man
there's too many yeses i got eduardo i
got will um let's see let's see uh
joshua fox i'm gonna send you some
stickers
um let's see marcus wong i'm gonna send
you some stickers i think that's four is
that four is that four people i've said
so right there um oh i saw raphael owen
said a couple times we're gonna give him
some stickers
uh and the last person type yes one more
time and we'll
pick someone out oh they're coming in
quick it's hard for me to follow uh
let's go ahead and give jasmine last
sticker okay thank you guys i have
another giveaway so get your get your
keyboards ready pay attention we'll do
another giveaway those are the six
stickers if you won go ahead and send me
a message on linkedin and i'll get them
sent to you okay
um all right let's actually go over the
goal of what we're going to be doing
today um my webinar is basically aimed
to help people who want to break into
data world okay if you're lost you're
unsure you've been hearing about data
you know data science data engineering
data analytics and you feel like oh that
sounds interesting i want a tech career
this my goal is to help you today to go
basically from being a little bit lost
to having a clear plan that you can
action eyes on you can actually take
action okay that is my goal is to take
you from someone who maybe doesn't know
what to do right now to have a clear
path and this clear path is going to be
my top 10 tips
so first i want to start off a little
bit about who i am i've asked a little
bit about you guys i've seen you um
i've seen you know where you're from
i've met a lot of you on linkedin maybe
talked to you guys on instagram once or
twice um but a little bit about me if
you don't know my name is avery smith
i'm 26 years old i'm based out of salt
lake city utah and i'm actually a
chemical engineer as my undergrad that
was my undergrad was in chemical
engineering um but now i'm a data
scientist so i run a little boot camp
called data career jumpstart which i'm
going to talk about a little bit later
today um where i help other people break
into data science but i've spent the
last year actually running my own
business called uh
snow data science sorry i don't know if
i said that right data career jumpstart
is the bootcamp i run my own little
analytics firm called snow data science
where i help businesses consult and
freelance and do contract work for
businesses okay
um before that i was an
in a data scientist for exxon mobil so
this is me at the exxon mobil campus in
houston and before that i was a data
scientist at a company called vapor
sense and this is the vapor sense
building in salt lake city utah i've
also spent the last year trying to help
people learn data science on linkedin
and i've grown my linkedin to just shy
of 20 000 followers in the past year
while running my analytics firm i've
done really cool projects i've got to
meet people from around the world help
businesses from around the world help
doctors physical therapists cyber
security companies do all these
different projects and data science
things and it's been really fun
um in a nutshell i've learned the
secrets to become a data scientist and
land high paying jobs and i'm super
stoked to be sharing them right now with
you
oh no one can see the slides thank you
for mentioning that
my bad
all right there we go thank you amina
for uh
telling me that i've been showing slides
over here so here's some slides
this is me
this is uh what i've been doing
um
oh my god
okay now you guys can see the slides
which is great because we're gonna get
into how i got started okay
so i started actually six years ago
almost this week okay where i was a
freshman in college i was working in a
chemistry lab i was mixing chemicals i
was doing data science or no sorry i was
not doing data science i was wearing
gloves i was doing beakers i was mixing
chemicals sometimes i have to wear a
mask because of how dangerous the
chemicals were i was dealing with
hydrofluoric acid i saw we got some
chemicals
chemical engineers and chemistry people
in the chat you guys know hydrofluoric
acid it's very dangerous i was dealing
with that a lot and my job was
monotonous and boring i didn't feel
challenged and honestly i was miserable
a ton of the time i was really bored
and uh to pile on that the worst part
was i was studying chemical engineering
i wasn't interested in my classes i
didn't find process interesting i didn't
find thermodynamics interesting so i
felt like i was setting myself up for a
career that i was just not going to
enjoy
but one day i was working this company
in this lab and we actually had a data
scientist on staff okay
um and that data scientists quit small
company only about 14 12 people and the
data scientists quit okay
and we didn't have a data scientist for
six months we couldn't find one they
were so expensive they were hard to find
they were in demand we couldn't hire
data scientists and so finally i was in
the lab making all this data running all
these tests dealing with all these
chemicals one day i was like well i'm
done waiting i've taken some programming
classes i've taken some math classes
like i can probably figure something out
and i got to work so i started doing
programming i started without my boss's
permission i started making this program
that would basically analyze the data
that i was making and looking back on it
it was kind of a sorry script it was not
the best script in the entire world but
it automated like 20 of my job it was
written in matlab an engineering program
how many engineers do we have in the
audience if you're an engineer i want to
hear you say yes okay go ahead and
comment yes if you're an engineer that's
what i was and i knew matlab so i was
programming in matlab and to be honest
it was not the best program but it would
save me three four hours a week and this
is kind of what it looked like actually
this was the output so you can see
here's some of the code up here and
here's some of the output it was a
pretty basic code okay but eventually i
showed my boss and i was like hey is
this useful like i built this from
scratch you know i know we don't have a
date scientist is this helpful
and my boss was like oh this is pretty
cool and i asked my boss uh well if this
is so cool can i spend maybe 20 of my
time doing it and he was like yeah sure
so i started doing 20 programming and
analytics and 80 of my time in the lab
and that number eventually got 50 50
where i was doing 50 data and 50 lab
which is my domain okay
but here's the thing i had a huge
problem now i now have kind of like an
analytics job i was doing a lot of
programming i was doing a lot of
analytics but i had this huge problem i
didn't know what to learn okay and on
top of that even if i knew what to learn
i didn't know where to learn it that's
so frustrating has anyone felt similarly
before that is how i felt there was no
defined path there was no curriculum i
had only met the one data scientist
before so i had no idea what to do so i
spent hours in the library checking out
these huge textbooks they're like we
haven't seen anyone check that out for
like 20 years i know i'm trying to learn
data science oh okay i tried to read
every blog some of them were useful some
of them weren't i watched a bunch of
youtube some of it was good some of it
wasn't i was trying to figure out how to
learn data and through all of that i
ended up falling in love with data i was
really stoked on it i was trying to
learn as much as i could i ended up
landing a after taking some
undergraduate classes and a lot of
self-study i ended up landing a job at
exxon mobil an internship actually
um inside of their r d division inside
of one of their optimization computing
groups
and it was a pretty cool internship it
paid me 42 an hour as a student so that
was awesome and i ended up building an
app there that got evaluated at a
billion dollars okay and i'm not making
that up that was straight from the lips
of the vp at exxon i prototyped this app
in three months in python while i was
there and that number is way too big i
don't believe it okay uh it's it's way
too big it was worth something in the
millions but it was not a billion okay
but i made a big enough impression to
get hired back full-time
to this group at exxon mobil with a
six-figure salary so i was pretty stoked
right out of college to do that
so i went directly from chemical
engineering to exxon mobil inside of
this group that does a lot of
programming they really liked that i had
a chemical engineering background um but
i decided i wanted to become an expert
in data okay so i thought in order to do
that oh you need to go to school so i
actually enrolled in online masters at
georgia tech okay and guys i just
graduated this week from this from this
degree i will tell you you do not need a
master's degree to become an expert in
data i am living proof of it because i
just graduated this week and i've
started my own business for a year so
you definitely do not need a master's
degree it was 10 over 10 000
and to be honest only about half the
classes were worth it um so i'm going to
try to take all the good i learned from
the program and that's what i'm teaching
in data career jumpstart and a lot more
of the career aspects of having a data
career
so
while i was studying part-time working
full-time bay percent reached back out
to me and they're like hey we have some
projects for you would you like to
freelance and consult for us okay and i
was like sure so i was working at exxon
full time doing contract work for bay
percent and studying partially on the
side and then i was like man i'm making
a lot of extra cash you know got some
extra cash in my pocket go on vacation
those types of things i was like i like
this freelancing thing so i started
applying for more jobs on upwork which
is a freelancing platform i started
landing all these gigs and pretty soon
i was posting them on its or on linkedin
every day and people started reaching
out to me on linkedin hey we have this
data project can you do it for us hey
you know can you make this graph for us
i started landing all these jobs through
these different sources and eventually i
had such a big clientele built up i was
actually making more per hour in these
consulting jobs than i was at exxon i
had enough clients where i was like man
i could make more money just doing this
myself and so i quit exxonmobil this is
in january and i started snow data
science and that's what i've been doing
for the past year is doing this
consulting jobs um it just basically
made more sense because i was just
making more money that way um so like i
said i knew nothing about data if you
told me the term data science six years
ago i had no idea no idea machine
learning no clue what it was and now i
today i charge over a hundred dollars an
hour for my services now i want you guys
to do the same but more effectively
because it took me six years of work and
study and guys it's not going to be
overnight for you guys but i've
definitely learned a lot of things that
could could have made my process a lot
faster and hence that's why i'm teaching
you guys on this
i'm teaching you guys my top 10 secrets
to breaking data science to help you
with that so i just want to take a
couple questions ron asked here how long
did it take you to do the
the degree it took me six semesters so
two years uh right there
uh hamza's like the masters is not
required yes i i agree um suman asked
how many years have you been a data
scientist i started six years ago that's
where my journey started with the
official title
uh probably three
so hopefully that helps
um okay i'm going to keep going here
we're going to do my top 10 secrets to
break into data science i'll try to take
some questions along the way so feel
free to add them to the chat i see some
of them i have some on my team trying to
answer some of the other questions as
well so hopefully you see that
okay so number one my tip is you need to
learn what careers are available you
might think data scientist is the only
way you can do data science no it's not
true saying that you have to be a data
scientist to do data science is like
saying that you need to be a
mathematician to do math how many of you
guys use math in your in your work right
now i'm guessing mostly all of you and
you're not mathematicians right like you
use math regardless so there's data
scientists data analysts and data
engineers data analysts are typically
like the more entry positions although
they can get very senior as well they're
doing more descriptive analytics data
visualization cleaning data providing
insights making dashboards versus the
data scientists does everything a data
analyst can do with more advanced
programming and typically machine
learning so you're actually getting into
like ai and like predictions and stuff
like that a data engineer is a little
bit different they're doing like
pipelines they're connecting a to b
they're doing data structures and all
that good stuff there
so they're more like infrastructure and
less about insight but those are the
most three popular data jobs but they're
not the only data jobs check these out
how many of these have you guys seen
before data vis expert machine learning
engineer data journalist data software
sales statistician there's so many data
rules for you guys out there that aren't
those first three roles there's a world
of data careers available so you guys
can become a data architect you can
become a product manager all of those i
would say are data careers
they're just not talked about as much
and even better there's actually these
really cool careers where you take a
domain and you add data and you get a
career so for instance chemo matrician
is someone who has data with chemistry
and they become a chemo attrition that's
an actual title that people hire for
okay so all my chemical engineers all my
chemistry people in the audience okay
that's a really good option for you guys
to do is become a human nutrition how
about business plus you know data you
can be a business analyst but i have a
trouble saying this word okay say this
with me ready bioinformatics
bioinformatician
that's when you do bioinformatics which
is biology plus data that's like a whole
field with like sub with sub roles too
and psychometrician that's really cool
that's um psychology mixed with data
they actually scan your brain and like
use the data the scans from the data or
the data from the scans like come up
with really cool insights straight from
your brain so i think these are some
awesome jobs and this is a big part of
the you know
of the course is you don't need to be a
data scientist you don't need to be a
data though analyst there's so many
other roles i do see we got uh travis
here travis going for the date of biz
expert travis had a pretty sweet
interview on monday he was telling me
about uh to land these types of roles so
see you don't have to be a data
scientist there's more options than that
um i do see some other questions if i
don't answer your question while we're
going through this session i will
definitely answer it at the end we have
a whole q a session so stick around to
the end and you guys can ask me whatever
you want and i will stay on here for as
long as there are questions
you might be thinking though ah avery
though i don't have any experience and
you might feel like this i posted this
on linkedin and instagram the other day
some of you guys may have seen it but
have you ever felt this way before right
here i can't get a job because i don't
have experience because i can't get a
job it's an endless loop it's so
frustrating right it is so hard you're
like oh i want to do a job i don't have
any experience well let me tell you some
four tips that you can take to break
this cycle
one you can make a new opportunity in
your current role think about when i was
in the lab right i was in the lab i was
doing chemistry i was mixing things i
didn't have any real like data analysis
experience
but i started programming that program
on my own i didn't ask my boss for
permission i made a new opportunity in
my current role to use data to solve an
important problem you guys can follow
that example and do the exact same thing
next you can do a personal project
outside of work so it doesn't to gain
experience it doesn't have to be in work
you could do it outside of work
so maybe you love the nba you love
basketball you can do some analysis on
the utah jazz for instance or any sort
of sports team and make a little
write-up about it and that gives you
experience because you're learning
outside of work it still counts as
experience trust me
next you can volunteer for a non-profit
there's lots of non-profits out here
that have tons of data okay so much data
and
man you can help them so much you can be
of assistance to them in so many
different ways they'll take your time
and that's experience they'll hire you i
promise okay not higher they'll let you
work for free and that's the next thing
is intern for cheap or for free i just
recently so like i said i made six
figures last year i just interned with
the utah jazz for free because i knew it
could give me experience that i wanted
my resume and yeah i know that's that's
that's hard to do sometimes sometimes
you can't swing it and that's fine
sometimes you can do it for cheap okay
so
um hopefully you guys can uh see all of
that and see how that can help you in
your life okay
you might be thinking uh i don't have
the right background though okay so that
that could be true but i'll ask you this
okay
what is the right background
what is the right background what do you
guys think the right background is what
is the right background for data science
is it cs
is it stats
is it something else go ahead and
comment um
go ahead and comment what you actually
think the best background for data
sciences do you guys think it's cs
stats something else what is the right
background for data science
let me ask you this does this change
your question
the um
the job is data scientists at exxonmobil
what is the right background there
is it's cs stats what is it
and i'm gonna answer give you my answer
with a story okay
so while i was at exxon they have
something called a game it stands for
analytics game and it's a huge
crowdsourcing competition where they
basically say hey we have a business
have this problem
and you guys can help us solve it using
data here's the data set now go and give
us the best results that you possibly
can okay and they give that and it's
crowdsourced it's open anyone can join
so about 200 people join this
competition okay data scientists i t cs
people stats people chemical engineers
like me
and i joined this contest okay i'm going
against phd you know data scientists
people with phd in economics people with
phd
in cs with stats that's my competition
guys guess what happened
i won this is the sticker they gave me
for being the a-game champion i have on
the back of my work laptop when i was
there okay i beat all these phds in this
analytics competition and how did i do
it it's because i knew oil i knew energy
i knew chemistry so that was that was
actually the problem was basically you
know all these different oil properties
and they're trying to help us solve an
oil problem because i'm a chemical
engineer and i understand the domain and
i have data skills i was able to beat
out all these phd you know computer
science all these it people because they
didn't know anything about oil they
didn't know anything about the domain
okay so for instance
um for all my oil people i saw there's a
lot of chemical engineers one of the
things that you that was useful was that
sulfur is bad in oil and none of the
data scientists strictly data scientists
knew that but i knew that it's that type
of information that helped me i also
knew who to talk to i had connections in
the industry so it really helped me
to win this competition and that's my
step number three your domain knowledge
helps you it does not hurt you there's a
benefit it is not something to be
ashamed of so you're like oh i don't
have a background in in data i don't
have a stats i don't have a cs degree no
you're fine you're in a great place your
domain helps you it does not hurt you so
for instance if you have a marketing
background you can become a marketing
analyst for code
if you have a petroleum or a geology
background you can become a data
scientist at shell if you have a
business background become a business
analyst with baker hughes
your domain should become your best
friend okay it is not going to hurt you
it is going to help you
okay you're not qualified today to
become a senior data scientist i'm just
telling you now that's fine i might grab
a glass of water
um you're not qualified to
be a data scientist today okay a data
scientist a senior data scientist today
you need a stepping stone job that's
what i like to call these types of jobs
so here you are here you are in your
current role it's kind of like the shock
you're not really liking it it's not
that comfortable and here's your goal
you want to have a beautiful castle
amazing big beautiful
and you want to go from a to b okay but
you can't there's barriers i just saw
monica here said i feel like that's
what's expected for us to know
everything in the field okay um that's
super hard to know everything in the
field and we're actually going to talk
about that in one of the next tips but
there's all these barriers that's one of
the barriers okay
so
that is one of the hardest parts is
there's a barrier right here there's
crocodiles there's monsters that bury
this mountain
but often you can go from a to c to b
okay so you can use this little home as
a stepping stone drop and that's what i
did at vapor sense when i was there i
was in the lab technician you know then
i became kind of like this data
analyst and then eventually i became a
data scientist so i didn't go from
straight from a to b
went through the stepping stone job
and why are these stepping stone roles
they're basically any job that is
helping you learn and practice data
skills okay that is what this type of
job is
that brings us to our next point okay
there the fourth step the fourth secret
that i have is get paid to learn when
you're learning there's basically three
different options you can either pay to
learn like i did at georgia tech you
know pay ten thousand dollars
you can learn for free you can learn
online resources youtube there's lots of
free stuff out there or you can get paid
to learn get regular paychecks while
you're building your skill set
which one of these
would you like to have okay which one of
these is the most important to you guys
okay
um for me i'd rather get paid to learn
um
that's more important to me like that is
that is the ultimate goal if i can get
paid to learn i'm down for it all right
um so you need to find a role that lets
you learn so at vapor sense when i was
doing 50 data 50 lab i was getting paid
to learn data
you need to find a job that encourages
innovation encourages development and
has a good boss my boss was awesome
there wanted me to learn all the time
and if you can learn on the job that is
the best way to learn because it's
experience and you're getting paid to
learn at the same time that's what you
should be aiming for okay
next we have you need to develop your
skills
adding data experience to your resume
and money your bank that's what happens
when you get paid to learn skills
experience and money that's a trifecta
that's all you could ever ask for
so
let's pause for a minute okay i know
i've been going a million miles a minute
let's let's paid let's let's stop for a
second everyone everyone agrees getting
paid to learn is pretty good
um you could even travis has a good
point you can even have an employer help
pay for your education that's true
that's one way to do it right there for
sure
um
we have a question here what if we don't
have any coding knowledge at all
i mean we're actually gonna get to that
that's a great question we're actually
gonna get to that and i don't think you
should have coding knowledge to start
okay so don't worry about that right now
okay
so
we're gonna do another giveaway i want
you guys to type launch in the comments
okay type in launch in the comments
everyone type in launch and what's what
are we doing
we're doing a t-shirt so let me um let
me make me big
yeah we're doing a t-shirt it's the same
t-shirt that i'm wearing
daily career jumpstart we're giving away
a t-shirt all you do is type launch in
the comments and i'm going to do it a
different way this time so type in
launch the more types you type it in i
think the more likely you are to win it
i'm not exactly sure if that's how it
works um but i'm pretty sure it is and
i'm going to start collecting comments
here we have 40 people
keep typing in launch if you really want
to win it let me share hold on you share
my screen so you guys can see it
give me one second share screen
uh
tab
alright so
we have 52 55 entries
uh let's see last second to get in here
type in launch if you want the t-shirt
56 entries all right going down in three
two oh no raphael not not lunch launch
l-a-u-n-c-h all right i'm pressing it
ready three two one
all right here we go it is choosing it
is choosing
he's choosing
here we go
hp you are the winner send me a message
on linkedin and uh we will get you that
shirt
sound good
send this message on linkedin
okay
um
back to the action here let me get back
over here
let's see okay
yeah
sorry this they don't make it very easy
to do this there we go
okay hopefully you guys can see the
screen again
um
so
i've only talked about career skills so
far you know that person that was like
well what if you don't know coding i'm
gonna get to it right now okay but
here's the thing
you might be thinking what about
technical skills truth is the career
skills are more important because no
one's teaching them and no one's really
using them okay
so
let's talk about the tech skills uh
you have to have some tech skills but i
promise you the career skills are more
important
these are all the tech skills right here
i have a picture this is from uh what is
this guy's name matt truck he does this
every year called data and ai landscape
in 2020. and these are all the
technologies and all of the um
all the things that you need to know in
order to know all the things about data
okay so i'm going to zoom in on just a
subsection here because you can see
there's quite a bit this is just a
subsection of the analytics and machine
intelligence we have tableau we have
chardo we have mode we have microsoft we
have data breaks we have data aiku which
i think just one just creates a huge
round we have matlab math works right
here we have ibm we have so many
different things i have a question for
you
are you going to learn all of these
things
honestly are you guys going to learn all
of these things are you even going to
learn a fraction of them like do you
have time to learn all these things
here's another here's another way to put
it okay
this is this is taken from vincent
waterdam this he did this at a
conference i think it's hilarious he has
a bunch of technologies listed up here
and some of them are data technologies
and some of them are pokemon okay so
which one of these is a data technology
and which one of these is pokemon you
guys see any pokemons um
in here right or you see mostly data
stuff so for instance vulpix is that
pokemon or is that data technology it's
a pokemon um so anyways the point is
there's so many things that you can
learn there's so many crazy names like
how are you gonna learn that
what do you need to learn
what should you focus on
all right we're gonna do a poll here go
ahead and hopefully the poll works i
don't know if the poll works or not like
i said i have trouble seeing it but what
should you focus on i'm just gonna type
in the chat right here what should you
focus on
hit enter
william says yeah don't respect my boy
metapod
and travis is like pokemon rocks oh yeah
ditto that is pokemon okay so what
should we focus on go ahead and let me
know in the comments i see some python
i see some stats python and sequel
when he says uh where'd you go winning i
lost a sequel
eduardo says c
betty says sequel
uh we got some more sequel
what do you guys think what should we
focus on
you guys wanna know my answer all right
ready three two one my answer
none of these e okay we should focus on
none of these we need to focus on what
brings the most value to your career and
your organization that is what we should
be focused on okay that what brings
value that's what matters and so in my
opinion what brings value you need to
start with the ones that are low effort
and high value and what are those well
of course it's the things that takes 20
of the time and gives you 80 of the
effort
but what is that actually data
descriptive analytics and data
visualization okay
is
it's that simple these are two of the
easiest things in data science and they
bring the most value i'm telling you
guys you guys don't need to learn python
right away you don't need to learn r
right away you don't need to learn sql
right away you should learn descriptive
analytics and data visualization because
those things are the easiest to learn
and they bring the most value most of
the time you can do these things without
even coding at all and you're like oh i
already do these things i promise you
you can do them a lot better that's
going to bring a lot more value to your
organization okay i promise you these
two things are money makers they're
awesome you don't need a program which
means you can start today and most
organizations aren't even doing this
very well at all okay so that's why i
recommend starting with these let me
show you the power of data visualization
okay
how many nines are there inside of this
graph i'm gonna go ahead and let you
guys count how many nines you see inside
of this chart right here all right go
ahead and count i'm gonna grab a drink
while you guys are counting let me know
in the comments and you guys get done uh
why not i'll post a comment
how many nines can you see
all right i don't see any anything yet
so let me know how many nines do you see
gotta make sure that we're uh oh it
looks like we got the pull up okay so
maybe you guys are doing it in the poll
i'm sorry i i can't see the pull so let
me i'll check the pole here give me one
second
i see eight eight eight nine ten
nine seven eight eight
okay let me i'm gonna ask you the
question again ready i'm gonna change
one thing
how many nine are there now
one two three four five six seven eight
so whoever said eight you were right
unless i missed one um but you see how
much easier that got
that got so much easier
i like josh fox's answer here that
they're all nines they're all nines oh
maybe that was maybe he's back on the
other pole that we just did uh you see
how much easier this got when you add
color to the nines your tasks got so
much easier you can actually pull some
insight with way less work as the power
of data visualization
but you got to be careful though if you
had colors to everything so for instance
we have colors here how many twos are
there one two three four five six seven
eight nine ten eleven twelve thirteen
thirteen twos so but that's still harder
okay
so yeah uh magellan just said these are
just all principles yes that they are
this is like key date of this theory um
this is so much
better basically and these are things
that we're going to be talking about in
data jumpstarters how you can take data
visualization to a whole new level
um okay
so hopefully that that that helps you
understand what you should learn you're
like okay how do i get started learn
skills that'll transform my career
that's what you should be focused on
and in order to do that you just gotta
start just do it nike like that's that's
my biggest advice you just gotta get
into it and if you're just gonna get
into it the best way to do it is through
these barriers you're gonna face
sorry i was off one side but these are
problems you're gonna have okay what
exactly should you learn is this
applicable to real life you're gonna
lose motivation and even with you know
you could be the best python person in
the world if you don't have a job it's
not worth anything you know so you'll
definitely want to have a job so in
order to do that to beat these barriers
what we're going to do is something
called doing projects okay and projects
are what matters in the data science
world it is the cheat code of breaking
the date of science
you basically are going to find an
interesting problem and you're going to
use data to answer it okay that is what
doing a project is it's not an
assignment it's not an exercise it is
something that you're actually generally
interested in and you think you could
help
so for instance here are some examples
you could do breast cancer prediction
there's a great data set out there that
helps you train machine learning models
to actually look at an x-ray or whatever
and say is this cancer or no
you can come up with an algorithmic
trading bot anyone in here take my uh
predict the stock market with python
class and we made an algorithmic trading
bot okay you could have actually trade
bitcoin for you automatically you could
hopefully make some money
going back to the pokemon i know we got
some pokemon fans uh earlier um you can
explore the pokemon dataset they have a
really rich dataset that's really fun
you can even create an automatic plant
watering system that could definitely
work
projects versus exercise what's the
difference exercises what homework is
they give it to you in school it's made
up okay it's often very short very a
fraction of the problem it's pretty
boring a lot of the time like it's not
actually that exciting
and
and uh it's incomplete okay so it's not
that fun um first is a project it's
realistic it's longer it's entertaining
it's complete
um so projects are a way better way to
go i just noticed here that travis says
i need to link to that class so i run
that class for about eight months uh for
free um and now it's actually gonna be
pum become part of data career jump
start we're actually gonna make a lot
better in data career jump start we're
gonna do some data engineering and make
it really automated so get ready for
that
um okay so here's an example of an
exercise you can do you can solve k
dane's algorithm
give given an array r of n integers find
the contiguous sub subarray with maximum
sum does that sound very fun to you guys
does that sound really realistic or you
can do this is a project that i did with
some buddies about looking at the utah
jazz's data and coming up with some ways
that they could better shoot and win as
a team so it's so much more fun here's
some of our code right here we're
actually solving a real problem for a
real organization uh versus just taking
some crappy dumb algorithm thing okay
that's difference between projects and
exercises another way to explain it uh
or another way i'll try to explain it is
through these two videos i love to play
soccer any soccer fans if you're a
soccer fan let me know with a yes i love
soccer favorite teams probably arsenal
although we're really crappy so here is
difference here's an exercise on the
right hand side okay going through these
cones and here's an actual project when
you're doing a realistic game situation
with actual defenders an actual ball an
actual goalkeeper it's so much more
realistic what's going to help you learn
is it going to be this little drill
through the cones or is it going to be a
real life scenario it's the real life
scenario spoiler i'll just i'll just
save you the time to think here okay
so projects best they make actual
business problems they let you do
something you're actually interested in
and they show off your skill sets okay i
see we got marcus as united fan
uh nice arsenal yeah we're not very good
uh tayeb likes psg
uh let's see liverpool from mark
matthews
anyways so do projects okay
and projects are proof that you can do
what you say you can alright they are
the proof in the pudding they're way
better than exercises way better than
homework you gotta do projects you got
the stikas nice
um
one last final example would you rather
have a piece of paper that says i can
jump over a car or would you rather have
this video okay you tell me which one
you'd rather have the video or the piece
of paper that says i can't jump over a
car which one would you believe
if you were hiring someone to jump over
a car would you hire this person on the
left or this person on the right by the
way that person on the right is kobe
bryant
rest in peace kobe we love you um but
what would you rather have is someone
that has shown hey i've jumped over a
car before or someone that says they've
jumped over a car before all right
i rather have a person that shows it
versus the person that says it and that
is what a project is
so when you have a couple projects what
do you do with them
you build an online portfolio to show
them off so an online portfolio is like
a gallery where you can come see all
these different projects that i've done
so i actually have one of these this is
a this is a little demo of one of my
portfolios with a couple of maybe a
dozen or so different projects that i've
done that i send on my resume i send to
people that you know want to hire me
they can click on a project get more
information about what i did i make
little videos i make graphics i make
write-ups for them and it basically
explains what i actually did okay
so you need to build an online portfolio
and that's the biggest cheat code i
could ever give you because you need to
build an online portfolio and that is
what data career jumpstart is all based
around is building this portfolio
um that's the whole point of this course
so once again would you rather have this
or would you rather have that would you
rather have a one-page pdf resume or
would you rather have people look at
lines and lines of your code of your
analysis of all these projects of
pictures
potentially endless with a webpage i
promise you employers like the
right-hand side way more than the
left-hand side you actually need both
but you you link to your online
portfolio from your resume does that
make sense
um if you're with me here and you agree
with me go ahead and say yes so i know
that you're with me i love the portfolio
it's the best thing you can do
they're unlimited page resumes they're
more entertaining they're more in-depth
they're more memorable if you got a
piece of paper or a website and you got
a million what is more memorable the
website and i'll illustrate that with
this point right here who stands out
here
the gray fish or the pink fish
who stands out
where's your eye drawn to if you have to
choose one fish which one are you gonna
choose
you might choose a gray one you still
might choose a gray one but the odds are
you're gonna choose a pink one it's
interesting
it's very interesting okay
i love i love this from uh ryan newell
here hell yes i love it ryan
everyone agrees pink everyone's saying
pink the pink fish is what stands out
let me tell you experience so with snow
data science i actually was hiring a
data scientist uh three months ago i put
a i put an application out on linkedin
um how many how many people do you think
i got that applied to that job
go ahead and guess
answer 364 people applied for this job
i'm a one-man team
364 people applied i had such a hard
time going through all these different
applicants how was i going to choose the
right person for my career so here is
basically what that job posting looks
like looks like in fish talk this is 420
so a little bit more than 364. but you
get the idea
i had all these gray fishes you know who
stood out this one pink fish and he had
a resume he had an online portfolio from
his resume great portfolio i'm doing
business with him now so like seriously
you need to definitely be the pink fish
um
this this is a question i want to take
real fast um from ravi here this course
will be domain wise or more generalized
projects i was working an oil company um
so for right now the projects we teach
inside data career jumpstart they're
actually projects that benefit you in
your life so we have a project about
your own health how to improve your own
health how to improve your own screen
time so they're more general but they
can be applied i actually go through and
show how they can be applied to other
industries
so guys be the pink fish that's that's
basically my next tip is you need to
develop a personal brand
garyvee my favorite entrepreneur love
this quote from him where the eyeballs
go opportunity follows that's from
garyvee okay and that's what you need to
develop a personal brand you need to be
the pink fish
um so what is a personal brand the
effort to communicate and present your
value to the world
personal brands is being the pink fish
be the pink fish
let me ask you this how does this make
you feel
coca-cola
there's something that comes with that
right what about this apple
you think oh man that's sleek that's
nice that's new that's tech let me ask
you this
how does this picture make you feel how
does this picture make employers feel
when they see this what do they think
what's the first thing that comes to
your mind
and when your friend you know they're
hiring a data company right
they're hiring someone at their company
for a data role you want your picture to
come to their mind that is what
developing a personal brand is that is
becoming the pink fish i take this
question real quick from syed see what a
good website or platform for making
slash hosting data science portfolio
also paid or free um in data career
jumpstart i actually walk you step by
step of building a portfolio um like you
go through all the ins and outs of these
types of things i definitely don't think
you have to pay um
i
use gab pages but that's a pretty stupid
learning curve
you could use wix to get started to be
honest
okay
so the next step is to actually bring
your linkedin game up you need to have a
complete profile i don't want to see any
incomplete profiles you have a good
profile pic
everyone should have a profile pic of
their face okay you have a catchy
headline you need to be posting one or
two times a week this is how you build
your personal brand in a professional
setting really easy to do
why should you do this guys i i just
searched data on linkedin jobs the other
day 1.5 million open jobs okay 1.5
million jobs there's only one of you
there's there's uh 90 people on this
right now there's 90 of you guys and you
guys can take 1.5 million of these jobs
i guarantee you you can find one
linkedin hires three minutes per or
three hours per minute which basically
means we've been going for almost an
hour 180 people have been hired since
this training started and 86 of
recruiters are active on linkedin
so the other reason why you should start
posting is there's 756 million people
two million of them post weekly that
generates 5.4 billion views basically
this means uh that
no one's uh no one's posting and
everyone's looking so if you post you're
guaranteed these guaranteed i guarantee
it there's 5.4 billion every week and
only 2 million people are posting so
think about that do 5.4 billion divided
by 2 million that's how many average
views each post gets
um
when you got a question here when is
data crew jumpstart available it's
available today i'm about to get into
that um with a special launch price so
just hold on we're about to get into
that but it's available today
okay
um here's a poll that i took from my
friend jordan nelson
he asked people how did you get how do
you approach getting jobs
81 said they search jobs and apply he
said how did you get your last job and
notice here that only 35 of people
filled out an application meaning the
other 65
got recruited or
referred think about that this is the
this is the 80 20 principle this is
creative principle again
80 of your job hunt you're searching and
applying yet 65 of accepted jobs are
recruit and refer basically i'm not
going to say this that applying online
doesn't do anything
at all right but it does
so much less than having a personal
brand and getting recruited and getting
referred okay
so this is like a little analogy i came
up with basically having a personal
brand helps you have
a bigger net so here's a bigger net
right here all these opportunities are
luck or luck coins if you have a
personal brand you're much more likely
to catch luck you just you have a bigger
net to catch all this luck that could
happen and this luck could be getting
book deals it could be getting a new job
it could be switching you know careers
just personal brand equals bigger net
and if you have a bigger net have a
personal brand you start to make jobs
come to you so these are some real
messages that i got
from people on linkedin these are from
recruiters on linkedin in my linkedin
inbox this is from amazon asking me to
come interview for a job
this is a year later in my inbox as this
is amazon asking me to come interview
for a job
this is audible a company from amazon
coming to ask me interview for a job
this is a blackstone
recruiter asking me to come interview
for a job this is facebook emailing me
asking me to come interview for a job
this is instacart messaging me on
linkedin asking you to come interview
for a job
this is i don't know who this is some
random guy more random people more
random people all these people in my
inbox asking me to come work for them
okay i'm nothing special
i'm nothing special you guys can be me i
knew nothing about data six years ago
you guys can do this these jobs can be
in your inbox if you
follow these nine steps okay if you do
these nine secrets you're going to land
a good job in your inbox i promise it i
promise it's guaranteed that's what i do
that's what i've done you need to learn
what crews are available make your own
experience
use your domain get paid to learn learn
the easy things build projects and do uh
portfolio and start posting on linkedin
you guys are going to guarantee gonna
get okay i'm sorry i'm saying guarantee
so much it's not guaranteed nothing in
life is guaranteed but i promise you
this is a better way than just randomly
applying online every single day
amazing jobs are gonna come to you okay
so
with all of that being said obviously i
can't cover those are my top 10 secrets
to breaking data science i obviously
can't cover all of these in depth in
just the what we've been going for 50
minutes um hopefully i touched on each
one of these here and you have a better
idea of what path you can follow um if
you want in-depth analysis about all
these different steps it's exactly what
i cover in data career jumpstart in my
course which is opening today i'm very
excited about it um and so i just want
for those who want to learn a little bit
more about these nine different things i
want to tell you a little bit about what
i cover in data curve jump start we
cover data analysis we covered personal
brand we cover programming from scratch
never program no problem we cover these
career tips we go over machine learning
we go over how to build a data science
portfolio guys i've built four different
portfolios on four different platforms
and i know what it takes now to build a
good portfolio again this training was
only an hour so imagine what all the
things you could possibly get from the
course
people are typically charging around
these different prices for these
different things um and we're going to
give you a much better deal today for
data career jumpstart so
in terms of curriculum um these are the
things that we cover we start with kind
of like getting into data
learning about describing data doing
analysis building dashboards data
visualization and our first project is
actually one where we use our screen
time we collect our data from our phones
and we analyze it in a dashboard in
google data studio it's really cool to
actually see how much time we're
spending on our phone and what apps and
how we can improve our lives with that
we have a fun project where we learn
python called project fitness where
you're basically going to of course add
this to your portfolio you're going to
collect your health data from your phone
or your smart watch you're going to
analyze how many calories you walk or
how many calories you burn how many
steps you walk all that good stuff and
then we'll move into machine learning
i'll teach you why machine learning
isn't scary and how you can totally do
it we'll do uh an out we'll do a project
where we predict stocks and make a stock
bot we'll also a project where we
analyze our own spotify music data and
of course we're going to cover things
like stats and r and sql i have a whole
section getting prepared about how to
interview where to find jobs and how to
even start freelancing as a data
scientist and build your own data
science analytics company and career
ah my ultimate goal of data career
jumpstart and i'm not sure you guys are
100 gonna believe me on this this is
literally my ultimate goal i want you
guys to steal my clients i seriously do
i want you guys to steal my my clients
from snow data science i want to help
turn your knowledge into cash that is my
goal
i love this quote give a man to fish and
you feed him for a day teach man to fish
and you feed him a lifetime i really
want you guys to start making money
doing data so this is what you're going
to get in data career jump start these
are some of that the extra bonuses on
top of everything that we've already
talked about um
because i'm in the data community i'm
very active i've developed some really
cool relationships with ceos employers
recruiters all of these cool people that
are hiring data people so because of
that data career jumpstart members are
going to have access to exclusive leads
from my network and potential job leads
actually while i'm thinking about it i'm
one of our members that got in early
matt you'll actually see a message from
him in a second uh
before before like basically before he
even started the whole thing um he had a
conversation with a uh venture-backed
tech company um as a co-founder it's a
physical therapist iot wearable device
anyways so
i i'm helping people get jobs inside of
dcj
we're also gonna be doing these really
cool things called data hackathon
contests where you'll work in teams or
as individuals and you'll solve real
life problems from real companies so for
instance i already have one
newsletter that we're going to do in the
next month or two where this newsletter
has a bunch of data and we're going to
help them improve their actual you know
analysis and their actual production
their actual product we're gonna do that
and whoever comes up with the best idea
whenever it comes to the best solution
maybe the top three or so they're gonna
win prizes okay they're gonna win cash
prizes so there's even a chance that you
guys can make more money than you
actually spend
buying this course that's a real
possibility that could happen
um that's actually one of the best parts
about data career jumpstart is the
community because you're gonna be
building relationships and growing your
network we have a private community page
with an awesome community forum where
you can mentor people be mentored ask
questions you know meet like-minded
people that basically you're just not
going to feel as alone when i was
breaking data science i felt so lonely i
felt so confused this way you actually
have people with you and help you
understand what's going on you'll have
friends okay these people are going to
become your friends and of course you're
always going to have me as a mentor
we're going to do group mastermind
meetings at least twice a month where
i'm going to do resume reviews i'm going
to do job search help i'm going to do
project reviews we can do code reviews
of those that's basically a time where i
hang out with you guys you ask them
anything you want any mentorship you
want we just go over and try to help
people improve their data careers
um you also have my personal email where
you can email me at any time unlimited
any questions that you do have
of course i'm going to be talking about
my favorites some of the best things
like my favorite books in data science
my favorite computer gear all that good
stuff
um so it's it's going to be a lot of
extra bonuses as well
so oh i can't forget the discounts as
well this is just two of the discounts
we have 25 off dedicated academy some
really in-depth data visualization
courses there we have 15 off to learn
data engineering so if you want to get
more in depth about data engineering
this is the place i suggest going so
definitely check that out okay we have
more discounts from this we have some
free stuff in robin hood wix lots of
discounts and i'm still working hard to
get more discounts okay we're building
those up as we go
so there you have it that is what data
jump juror jumpstart includes is a
lifetime memberships there's only one
upfront cost and you'll have access to
all the current content and all the
future content for life because i'm
still building this out as we go um you
can watch at your own pace on your phone
or your computer
and you have honestly enough content in
there right now that it's worth a
semester of college but you don't take
it from me this is matt this is one of
our members he joined maybe about two or
three weeks ago um and you can kind of
read a little bit about what he says um
i really like this line right here i've
already made some changes in my
direction to get my desired career
faster thanks to dcpa so matt's awesome
if you guys want to meet matt definitely
join him in the data crew jumpstart
community
so
with that let's go ahead and go into
pricing as promised i said i was going
to give you a huge discount um i really
believe that this course has a ton of
value um i think this course is about
four thousand ten thousand dollars in
value that's what other people are
selling these types of things for um but
today i'm really going to i usually sell
it for about
19.97 that's what the regular price of
data crew jumpstart is but since i'm
just getting started and i want to let
as many people in as i possibly can i'm
doing special launch pricing today and
it's only going to be for the next five
days next seven days i'm doing 797
launch price you can join data crew jump
start today for 7.97 and of course we
have a payment plan that you can pay
over six months as well basically it's
60 off
on top of that um with the super low
pricing there's an exclusive launch
offer today for the first 25 people who
buy i'm gonna be giving one-on-one
coaching calls um those are worth two
hundred dollars i usually charge about
200 for these coaching calls um so
you're gonna already get 200 worth of
value which is like a fourth of the
course a third of the course right there
for the first 25 people who join okay oh
here's matt
matt's here i didn't even know that uh
that matt was here
um
yeah there's matt and uh he's uh yeah
like i said if you guys want to meet
matt moore you can definitely join
um so with that said i'm gonna go ahead
and pull up the offer um the law
the code you need to use is launch okay
use the code launch that's the coupon
code okay and that's gonna give you the
big discount to get the 797. use the
code launch right now at the bottom of
the screen i'm going to check if it's
there
because it should have popped up while i
was talking let's see if it is there
refresh
um
yep okay it's there and it's also in the
chat as well um at the top of the page
of the chat you can go ahead and secure
your spot in data career jumpstart with
the discount and the bonus
right now by just clicking that button
right there or it should be in the live
chat up here
um and that should take you to a page
that looks like this and all you need to
do is uh
is type in the word launch right here
and that will give you that discount so
once again
um
type in launch and that will give you
that discount so and
you should do it as fast as you can if
you want to grab those first 25 101
coaching calls um i'm really stoked
about this program i hope you guys are
stoked as well um i'm really excited for
you guys to get signed up and hop in the
course and uh that that's basically data
crew jumpstart i'm super happy to answer
any questions that you guys may have i
know we had some people drop off because
it works things but um
i'm so excited for this guys i really
hope i spent the last six months trying
to make this a great place to learn and
help you guys in your daily careers and
i really hope to see a lot of you guys
inside of the course uh but with that
i'll go ahead and take any questions so
let me um make it
maybe make me a little bit bigger here
what what questions do we have
um i'll go back a little bit here
here's the question what's the
difference between data engineering and
data science okay so the difference
between data engineering and data
science is engineers are really focused
on structure they're really focused on
how like data gets from a to b
the infrastructure you know they're
focused on scaling things databases
putting things into production cloud
computing versus data scientists are
more focused on insight that makes
sense yeah hit me up with any questions
that you guys may have
um let's think and make sure you use the
code launch i need to make sure that's
up there as well oh one thing i also do
want to highlight is i do have a money
back 30 day guarantee so if you guys
join the course and you guys are just
like this isn't for me
i don't like i don't like the uh
the teaching style then yeah that no
problem totally get it
full refunds within 30 days
this year had a question here is there
any monthly payment options and there is
let me um let me actually just really
quickly
um
well yes if you go to that link
uh you should have another option at the
bottom to go
and do a monthly payment option of six
months um and you can once again uh use
the code launch there i think or
actually i think i already have that
program to include the discount
so there is a payment
i'm currently a data analyst is data
crew jumpstart for me or is it people
with no background bill that's a good
question um danielle it's definitely for
both so it's designed to take you from
zero to something but it also would be
useful just to have the career tips and
also i don't know some data analysts are
more like programming heavy than others
but like for instance if you know like
you know python really well um we're
starting from python from scratch so
that's a good place to be i'd also ask
you do you know machine learning because
we're doing machine learning in the
course as well so if you're already a
data analyst this will help you level up
to your next salary buff so one of the
videos i talked about you know you might
be you might be at like 60 000 us
dollars right now day occurred jumpstart
could help you hit like 80 for instance
by landing a data scientist's job or it
could be like from 70 to 72 but you just
have a more flexible schedule
so definitely can be useful for data
analysts
um
how much of the course is ready and how
long do you anticipate until it's
finished um so right now i have about 40
current videos up there i'm hoping to
eventually get to about 100 um so about
i guess that's i guess that's 40 i
wouldn't go that high i guess i would
probably say about 30
is done um but the cool part is you guys
need to be founding students and help me
out um so if you're like hey i want to
learn more about this i'll go ahead and
make a video on it i guess no problem
like you guys i'm here to help you so we
can definitely make it more customized
to you
and more structure to what you're
learning
um so
in terms of finishing it i don't know if
i'm ever going to finish it it's kind of
my baby like i always want to be adding
stuff to it like lifetime access um in
terms of like finishing all the stuff
that is scoped out
i would say
by the end of the year maybe a little
bit after that maybe march of next year
to have every single thing done um but
i'm i'm building at least one module a
month so and it usually takes people
because the projects are pretty in-depth
it usually takes people about two weeks
at least to do a project so by the time
someone finishes a project the next
project's up most of the time
when does the discount code expire um so
the discount code expires in six days so
i will not this one time payment of 7.97
that's only valid for launch week after
that it's gonna go up from there um and
that's also true in terms of the future
so when i finish the course i will not
be having a launch price of 7.97 um just
because there will be more in the course
of that time so this is kind of like an
early bird special
that you can you can check out um so
yeah the code does expire in in six days
and of course the 25 members is first
come first served
is the course at your own pace or do you
have timelines to complete sections so
the course is at its own pace
but with that being said i thought about
some people need a little bit of
motivation so i thought about having
some sort of like try to do this in two
weeks but
it is at your own pace so it maximizes
your flexibility you know if you're
working if you're doing other things you
can kind of go at your own pace um but i
i've been thinking about how can i help
people you know get a little bit of push
that's actually one reason why um
like paying for it is a good thing i
know this is gonna sound funny but the
the price is supposed to hurt a little
bit let me tell you guys i am a little
bit out of shape um i want to lose some
weight i've been trying to lose weight
for like two years
and i
i it's hard i have not been succeeding
this year i was like you know what i'm
gonna spend money i spent probably
two grand a grand on races running races
and i've been much more motivated
because i'm like i gotta prepare for
that race you know and the bunny kind of
helps me uh my friend matt who's joined
data crew jumpstart we have this thing
it's pay for torture that's you know you
pay to get tortured but it helps you
grow so it's worth it
um let me go through some uh more
questions where is this at
um i lost where i was at sorry what is
the average length of your videos um so
videos are usually it really depends
some of the videos like um are about six
minutes probably most of them but the
ones where i actually do technical stuff
like making the dashboard or programming
those get a little bit longer um
hey
yeah but i try to make that i also like
cut out all my homes and stuff like that
so the videos are very succinct um so
yep
question here will we always have access
to as content gets added is there an
expiration date when we kind of access
the course no you can always have access
to the course um i don't see this this
is always going to like be around um if
it ever gets to the point where like uh
the course doesn't exist anymore you'll
have access to download all the videos
but i don't see that happening in the
future so you'll always have access to
these videos you'll have access to all
the future content that goes into data
career jump state
ah
let's see got some more questions matt k
sorry i'm going to read it here thank
you for an awesome class and advice
besides a personal project what do you
recommend for breaking into data in the
sports industry and how you intern with
the utah chess oh man matt uh the sports
industry is so hard to break into that's
why i worked for free for the jazz
because i just i love sports and it's so
competitive because everyone wants to
work in sports it's so fun
and so sports is not a place i'd
recommend anyone to go unless you have
an insane passion because you're never
going to make as much money as you can
in other places but if you really want
to break in
okay yeah you should you should do
projects and then you should you need to
pay like two thousand dollars to go to
the sloan sports conference and that's
where you can network and meet people
it's mostly who you know not what you
know when it comes to sports so i
wouldn't recommend it 100
what is the average pay for a fresh out
of university data analysts in the us um
that actually is one thing we cover
inside the course it's typically around
sixty thousand dollars data analysts are
a little bit lower the data scientist is
about uh the average is 114
um so
yeah hopefully that uh that makes sense
any web oriented skills like web uh
node.js so we do cover how to make a
dashboard um
using a google data studio which
obviously is not web developed
development um in the python section
maybe someday we're going to use plotly
to make a dashboard which is actually a
wrapper over uh js
over what is it called
not flask what's the other one called
it's escaping my mind web development
for javascript anyways um so we might
cover that but there's no strictly
node.js we might cover a little bit of
javascript just because it's useful um
but it's not the first thing i teach
because it's not it had in demand in
terms of data science job i've done it a
couple times with no data science we've
got a couple different projects
that require javascript um but that's
pretty much it
christopher i'm glad you're excited i
hope to see you
oh betty's in betty
betty and i have been talking a little
bit for a couple months she's been a
huge supporter um i'm really excited to
have betty in the course and teacher
betty i'm so glad you're here uh thank
you so much for signing up um just
looking at it we have
we have a couple signups right here it
looks like
um
okay do you work with ux designers or us
researchers in your client work i'm not
looking to become a data scientist i'm a
designer i love working with data and
want to have carbon niche oh eliza um
you should talk to travis i don't know
if travis are you still here um travis
and i have been talking on instagram the
last couple days and he's also a
designer um that is kind of breaking
into like a data biz developer um
definitely talk to travis he just had an
interview on monday um
i
have never worked with ux designer
necessarily
my my designs aren't always the
prettiest i guess um on most ux i try my
best obviously but that's actually a
huge place to be and i wish i was better
at it um i've had a dashboard where i
wish i knew more about ux and design um
i had a like a
database pretty bro like make the most
interesting graphic which you guys are
killer as uh
um
as designers so i haven't necessarily
worked on it oh yeah here's travis
definitely check out travis right here
um he's a good person to know um thomas
i'm sorry matt just talking everyone i
have finished all right personally
experience exactly what i'm talking
about and i'm excited to join so thank
you for being here matt appreciate it
um the installment plan is pretty
awesome yeah i think it's six months i
remember the exact pricing um but you
can break it over six months which is
just pretty nice
um okay
uh what about programming i don't have
any knowledge would this course be
helpful for learning code yes 100
i start with prince hello world in
python um python in my opinion is the
most in demand not in my opinion it is
the most in demand language there is out
there it's the best for data science and
everything else um so okay it's not the
best for everything else but if you have
to choose one i choose python right now
um we go from scratch and python we'll
also do from scratch in our later in the
course so if you don't know programming
that's no problem we'd love to have you
here
um let me just make sure i answered all
these questions up here
let's see let's
see um
let's see
[Music]
okay i think i
oh
how do i let go of this ambition that i
can only be good at data analytics job
without being a pro at python or any
language for that matter that's super
hard but to be honest i mean imposter
syndrome is something we all face you
know it's very difficult to beat
imposter syndrome that's why i'm here
i'm here to help you um you can i have a
friend roshan um khan second episode of
my podcast data crew podcast you can
check it out
and um rashaan does everything in
tableau zero programming this guy goes
viral like nobody's business he makes
such cool data visualizations he's
teaching data visualization courses he's
getting gigs to make data visualizations
and dashboards for other companies i
don't think he programs at all so you
don't need the program to be a data
scientist to be in a data career
definitely you don't need to i promise
we'll help you through it i promise
um okay yeah so travis was here
avery sports talks equals facts yeah
it's really hard to break into sports
um
let's see what else what's up um yeah
travis is doubling down on date of biz
let's see
can this course get you to data
scientist level eventually yes it
definitely can it's gonna take some work
what what it comes down to is i'm going
to teach you the things but still going
to require you to do things so if you
have a killer
killer profile you could land a data
scientist a killer portfolio sorry you
could land on a data scientist job it's
going to take you a while to build the
portfolio and learn the skills but
that's the design of this course is it
could theoretically take you from
nothing to a data scientist now it's
going to be hard to get a job i'm not
going to lie you have to have a really
good portfolio but i'm going to walk you
through the steps we're going to do it
together
and you can definitely happen
um
oh nice who is this guy i want to follow
him too his name is roshan khan um
tribes go check out my podcast data
career podcast he's the second episode
his linkedin is there
uh
okay how much time
daily slash weekly do you expect core
students to spend on the course practice
learn and become efficient
that is a good question how much time do
i actually expect them to do i think it
depends how fast you want to do the
course um i don't like pushing
quickly like you can there's a bunch of
16 week 12 week boot camps i think it's
kind of exhausting to learn everything
at once i rather learn it really well
and i rather also another thing is
as you learn we're going to promote
we're going to as we learn we're going
to market you finish a project goes to
your portfolio we talk about it on
linkedin we talk about it on the
internet we apply to jobs so it's not
like learn everything at once and then
like go out on your own like you're so
busy learning that you can market
yourself you can like actually think you
can take notes you can ask questions
uh so i don't like to like push the
speed so people could really go as fast
or slow as they want
um in terms of how much time i expect
them to i think everyone has different
situations um you know different ones in
different walks of life some people will
want to spend you know a whole day on it
a week you know eight hours maybe and
some people will only spend two um so i
don't necessarily have a um
recommended time necessarily that's a
good question though i'll try to think
about it
um do you know if the us job
opportunities are available with someone
who's based in europe like remote jobs
adrian good question
um remote jobs are awesome first
um
that that's interesting i've never hired
internationally um and i don't know how
like hiring i know hiring international
is often pretty difficult especially
like visas and stuff like that
but if it's remote how does that work
i'm not exactly sure um i'll have to
talk to someone that is like a data
science manager and get back to you on
that because that actually is a good
question so sorry i don't know right now
but i can get back to you
any pointers on how
the knowledge of love development can
come in handy during the course um yes
if you this is actually a big thing in
demand right now um and this goes back
to i forgot name is certain m i'm sorry
for writing the designer um
if you can use web development skills
and make good data skills and have good
data skills and good design skills you
can make dashboards custom dashboards
for people and people will pay a lot for
that that's huge in demand um i most of
my work i end up doing is pretty much
the dashboards so if you have web
development so for instance
i can't remember the name of this hold
on
react react correct react there we go if
you don't react already or if you know
angular already and you add data skills
to that man you can make a lot of money
doing consulting
so
um
let's see
basir would you please
uh
would you please explain how the monthly
payment plan works the first installment
is calculated as 370 after using the
launch code
um
yes let me try to fix that real fast
um hold on give me a second
um
there might be some issues there hold on
give me one second
um
[Music]
give me one second one second
um
oh i think that's probably what happened
um hold on i'll need to fix that i guess
it should be
fixed now
um i'll have to come back to you on that
um
that might not be
100 right
um
this year i'll i'll come back to you on
that um
send me a message on on linkedin if
we're not connected on linkedin send me
a message there and let's let's figure
that
out um let me let me message my team
real fast
um
okay sorry send a message to my team
hopefully figure that out i'm answering
some more questions here
um
i've heard a lot about the technical
portion of the interview process i think
this is also a concern that prevents
people from applying early in these
developments um i mean yeah there's
obviously technical interviews sometimes
uh we're gonna talk about how to tackle
these i'm trying to work out a discount
for a really good program that helps
more with these technicals uh sections
um but uh yeah it is it is how it's nice
but to be honest not all of them have
technical sections so
i have the same question
from being abroad how applicable will
the career content advice i mean 100
applicable um some of the numbers might
be different like i mean i talk about
salaries and you know use u.s dollars
uh it might be different salaries
but in terms of the career hacks um
i i think the things i taught today are
applicable in any country i really do if
you do good work and talk about it
online good things are going to follow
um
so like i definitely think all the
careers are available
to you in that way
what are you teaching the course uh well
i teach
sorry everything we talked about r
python sql career hacks interviews stuff
like that it's not just python we use
sql we do r
we do non-coding languages we do lots in
the course all the stuff over here on
the right hand side
is uh is what we do
okay any other questions
any other questions let's do some more
questions
um
let me know if you have more questions
we still got 40 of you guys watching so
i'm happy to talk for a long time if we
need to
no problem at all
i'm gonna
um
[Music]
i'm gonna just check this link your
friends
uh ivy i i hope i answered the question
if you haven't seen this oh okay just
repeat it i see
um so yeah teach lots of fun things
not only for this iphone
okay let me see here
okay yes i have fixed the um
the
problem we had with the online i'm sorry
the payment plan the payment plan is not
fixed
um
i had some troubles with that so that's
actually kind of an issue
um
all right any other questions we still
have 40 people here all you guys are
here for a reason right
they can be non-data related too if you
just want to talk to me that's fine we
can we can just chat for a little bit
just checking on some
stuff
let's go make this money people i like
it travis let's go uh make some data
money it's gonna start a daily career i
love that energy
love it
love it love
thank you guys so much for joining i
know there's a lot of you guys here
today i think we have like hit 110
people all at once um so that was
awesome thank you guys for being here i
really appreciate it
working full-time i may not be able to
join the team vents when they happen so
can i skip cohorts and join one later
mab you can i mean you can always join
at a later date but the price is going
to go up um i'm not going to do the 797
again i don't think
um so i mean that's i mean you can
definitely join at any time that's 100
true
but uh
but uh
i recommend sooner than later in terms
of pricing
trying to take in all the wisdom i like
it
damien how are you going to make rudy go
bear a better player with your data
science skills train them
that's how we're going to make them
better i'm not a rudy guy
my internship with the jazz actually had
very little to do with basketball had uh
we did delete a lot of marketing in
sales
but uh oh
my team says love rudy i
team i don't love rudy i guess we love
rudy i don't know
i have no background in any of this yet
i currently work at a hotel front desk
will this course be helpful for a total
noob if i apply myself yes 100
100
oh map yeah yes the next day is fine
that's no problem um we uh
yeah you can you can join tomorrow for
the same price it'll only be like that
for a week though six days
um maybe i missed this but what can we
do the community part of the course i
show you here let me show you
um give me one second and i'll just show
you let's go i'll show what it looks
like huh to be inside of data crew
jumpstart let me stop my screen
reshare
um
losing my voice man
let's see
okay
so
go to
data jump start slash login
i'm already logged in so i have the
course on the left hand side and i have
the community on the right hand side so
come here ask questions tell your story
be inspired etc your family
open this up
and sounds good bob i look forward to
your message on linkedin
and same to you bigness and christopher
thank you for joining looking forward to
your journey stoked for it
okay so here is the uh community page
right now has like a feed section over
here on the left hand side
and uh it has topics on the
this other tab so you can introduce
yourself you can ask questions you can
do show and tell
this is where i have announcements so
it's basically a way there's also a way
where you can like see all the other
members and contact them so yep that's
what it looks like makes sense any
questions there
once i click the monthly payment option
the price increases to
2400 usd um but then you should be able
to do
the payment plan
if you type in launch
the payment plan should then pop up
um and that'll make it i think 960. um
so the payment plan is a little bit more
but you get the benefit of doing it
across
uh six months
um so
if you type in launch you should be able
to get the payment button
have 25 people already signed up let's
see i don't really know how to even
check
um
let's see
got a couple emails
um and you know what for all you guys
who are still here
you guys want to do um
uh let me let me check on that for you
eliza and for all those people who are
still here you guys want another t-shirt
i'll do another t-shirt hold on
let's type in here you go another
t-shirt
let's type in uh
let's make it let's just make a shirt
type in shirt
type in shirt
into the chat we'll do another little
giveaway real fast
uh yes of course aj you're welcome
you're very welcome
got some shirts
getting some shirts away
shirt
oh let me share my screen with y'all
you guys can see i'm not making up the
winner completely random
um
i guess i see people are commenting in
data correction so some people have
signed up i'm getting notifications that
uh people are talking in there all right
so let's start collecting
all right start collecting we got 12
entries anyone else want to unsure type
in nord shirt
let's see let's see
all right can you guys see everything
i'm gonna draw i'll make it full screen
for you guys right
raw
let's see let's see
adrian you got the shirt
send me a message on linkedin and i'll
get your address and we'll do it
um
cool
any other any other questions
um let's let's do some more questions
um i'm answering uh eliza's question i
think let me see
my screen's a little small
yes
but if you guys have any questions at
all this is the time i'm happy to answer
them
let's see
people
and there is
oh it looks like oil i need a filter in
here
let's see
yeah congrats
appreciation oh yeah of course adrian
you're very welcome
you're very welcome
let's see
filter five filters
okay well we're getting close to 25
we're not close we're not exactly 25 yet
but we're getting pretty close
so uh if you want to join now would be a
great time you definitely still have
those one-on-one calls left
um but uh
if you're yep so if you're interested go
ahead and join we still got those calls
um
that would be a great time okay sweet
there's 33 of you guys left i mean you
guys want to see you guys want to see a
little bit of the course should i show a
little bit of the course let me make
this big again
show what the course looks like
okay here's the course so you open up
here oh here's here's some things
uh graham smith said can i find a job
without a degree and does having these
skills allow for employment yes but it's
all going to be based upon how good your
portfolio is you have to prove people
you have skills in the past that has
been your diploma now is going to be
your online portfolio trust me it's way
better than a diploma
will we learn github for checking in and
out of code yes we will uh we will do
some source control uh it's not my
favorite subject of all time but i will
give an introduction to git and we will
do some sort of force control that is
correct
good question
okay so this is what it looks like if
you join
go ahead and hit open
kind of have these panels on the left
hand side with all the different videos
and different courses so for instance
here's one about what is a variable in
python you click on it
and you have this video right here
where
it shows kind of this intro and speaking
we do some demos in this video
and jupiter notebook
where i'm teaching you programming
basically from scratch
um you go back to your dashboard
you have things like the community that
you can open up you can change your
profile settings you can see some of the
recommendations you have a mantra click
on the podcast
my email
you can check out announcements that we
have here and then you can access the
modules this way as well so for instance
here's a little bit on the course intro
you would start on this uh welcome to
the course zero seven lessons complete
click on this
um read through this
you can download the app we actually
have an app version of the course you
can always take it on the go with all of
you guys
um
can we have the map of data somewhere
within dcj yeah for sure it's talked
about in dcj um i could definitely make
it downloadable though we can do that
for sure
thanks for asking
so you can download an app and have all
these videos on the go
um you can guess a little bit about me
so this is where you introduce yourself
here are some people that have joined
the community already
so you
add them on linkedin learn a little bit
about them all that good stuff
um in this video
so actually i'm gonna go back to that
real fast i don't know
i don't know uh jen
jenish i don't know you yet so i'm
looking forward to meeting you fun fact
i drink one gallon of milk every day
since i was a kid wow that's crazy
looking forward to meeting you if you're
still here
uh
yeah okay well great
this is uh let's go to like a more
technical section
um this is like where i set teach you to
set up a portfolio using wix
um so this is this is 21 minutes long
someone knows how long the videos are
this one's like one of the longest ones
because it's kind of a more complex
situation so here i am taking you step
by step
narrating you through how to do
everything to build your portfolio and
get it going
right there
let's see down here i would do a
dashboard so this is this is making a
dashboard using google data studio this
one's 18 minutes so also a little bit
longer
um
where i'm kind of explaining how to make
a dashboard and this is us actually
making it i'm doing the actual commands
yeah yolani you're very welcome thank
you for being here i appreciate it
um and all that good stuff so
does that make sense
the uh this is kind of what it looks
like here's let's go over one more uh
programming one oh yeah like let's go to
where to get python so even if you've
never programmed before i'll walk you
through how to download it where you get
it
um
those types of things so
makes sense
let me think uh let me think if there's
anything else i want to show you guys
i'll show you guys down here actually
here are some of the discounts i'll have
to be careful i can't show you exactly
the discounts
but down here we have discounts on all
of these different things right now and
we're adding to it i'm not going to
click on them because they have the
discount codes
you have to join and get the discount
code sorry but i have some of my like
recommended data visualization books
right here um
i have you know my favorite business
books that helped me my my career
um in this one i have my wrist
protection so you guys might see me i
usually wear a wrist brace
um
so yeah makes sense i i uh i also have a
checklist this is kind of one of the
downloadables here where you can
basically go
and make a copy and follow along this
checklist of all the things that you
need to do to basically have a data
career and then be expanding this as i
go so that's definitely one of the free
downloadables which is pretty fun
um
this is how to update your linkedin the
best way possible where i basically uh i
tell you what how you should make your
uh linkedin look
what settings you need to do and all
that good stuff
um and this one right here this video i
teach you how to start posting on
linkedin which is kind of fun like what
you should actually post what you should
say
um like how to structure it
i'm going to be adding more to this
section actually as well
i'm going to be adding my top i don't
know 20 posts so you just kind of copy
some of that
all right magellan asks here are there
minimum pc slash laptop hardware
requirements as we go through your
course and projects no i don't think so
for instance i have a mac so it's a
quality computer but it's like from 2012
so it's almost 10 years old and it can
do everything that i needed to
we actually do a decent amount of stuff
on the browser especially it started um
so i don't think you run into any
necessarily
big issues with older laptops as long as
it's functioning in the sql section
it might be getting a little bit like
you might want to have like a newer
laptop but as long as you don't have
like an older computer than me like as
long as it's in with next anything in
the next 10 years is going to work great
um and if it doesn't we'll work through
that we'll use a cloud computing system
uh on the browser so you can get away
with it so
that's actually one thing you can always
do if your computer can't handle a
computational program there's some
computer on a computer farm in the
middle of nowhere in iowa that
definitely can okay
um
i do want to do one thing hold on feel
free to ask me more questions
that's no problem whatsoever ask me
whatever you like
excel
we do
i tell you guys what the cheat code
software of data visualization is
really good to make really pretty
visualizations
um and then what that's down here
um sports analytics books i know someone
asked about sports earlier we have a
book section on here self improvement
books more data books all the cameras i
use and the office gear that i have
um
let's see
this is like setting goals you know 20
different degree
different career paths that you could
possibly take
this is the collecting your phone data
for your screen time you guys monitor
your screen time at all i use i always
monitor my screen time you go through
how to actually get that data out of
your phone
and then this is collecting your fitness
data which is pretty fun
you go over what a variable is what a
function is what a loop is
introduction pandas masking descriptive
uh analytics i got a couple more videos
i need to add into here um that we uh
just edited the other day and the other
thing i do want to do is i
i'm gonna actually reshare my screen i
just want to let you guys see
um some of the i'll let you guys see a
video here
um just so you can kind of hear
the audio and the
video because i spent a lot of time
trying to perfect
the um
the actual like
uh content of the course and the actual
production value so um hopefully you
guys can hear this i'm gonna go ahead
and press play
hi everyone and welcome to data card
actually i'm not going to use that one i
bought a new mic so you guys can hear a
better one hold on let me just use a
random one we'll start with this video
update your linkedin i bought a new mic
so it even sound even better
too but i think it makes me look a
little bit more friendly and a little
bit
kind of serious
reality i like using your videos i'm a
little bit more animated
i'm actually reading from the scripts
these emojis
um can i use my master thesis pe mess
for the portfolio i use python for
making predictions transport importance
media i'm thinking some privacy issues
with the university what do you think
yeah for sure for sure if you actually
go to my portfolio i have stuff i did
for work i had stuff i did for school
you can definitely add any sort of
project you've done in the past
uh as a on your portfolio i like this
face i'm making over here on my right
hand side kind of goofy huh
kind of silly but yeah you totally can
100
um
okay well let me think if there's
anything else
i need to tell you guys do you guys have
any last questions
any last questions if not no problem
i'll i'll be on on my linkedin and also
my website i'll just show you this
really fast
um
my website also has so if you're
davecreatorjumpstart.com
um you'll see some of these people that
bought just recently this is ao he's
been in the course for about a week down
here in the bottom right hand corner
there's a chat window oh i'm not showing
my screen i'm sorry hold on hold on
if you go to dadacarejumpstart.com
you have in the bottom right hand corner
a chat this is actually me on my team
that's talking to you so if you go to
you know
i'll just say start a chat with avery
i'm gonna say
my name is abes
i start a chat
i get a notification
on my phone
right here i don't know if you guys can
see but i get notification on my phone
where it literally comes to my phone and
i can start talking so i'll respond to
me right now
so i'm joining the chat
hey this is me
live on television
and you'll see that pop up on the bottom
right corner so it's really me it goes
straight to my phone okay so
definitely if you have any questions you
can ask me either via this chat right
here or if you know me on linkedin we
can get on linkedin
and we can talk there um
so
hopefully that answers all your
questions i see damian has a question
here i'm trying to debate breaking a
data analyst role does this fit the
scope or is it specifically for ds i
know some sql in python do not know are
in machine learning no this is not
specifically for ds it's it's for anyone
um it's for any data career there's so
many different data crews so definitely
if you're going from you know beginning
to becoming a data analyst this would be
a great class to take um you're going to
learn extra stuff that's only going to
make you a more qualified data analyst
um so
you'll learn machine learning and
that'll be like a little bit extra then
you'll need as a as a data analyst but
it would definitely be useful to you
so hopefully that answers your question
two hours of talking can make you or you
lose your voice
cool
well
we got 23 of you guys left i appreciate
each and every one of you guys um thank
you so much for watching i really
appreciate it
um
if you uh
you know what for you 22 people watching
i got one two three four five six seven
what is that one
i got 12 stickers
uh message me message me on linkedin you
22 people who are left and uh i'll get
you a sticker okay sound good
that's that's the last giveaway for the
day
um i hope to see you guys in day to
career jumpstart i'm really excited
about it i'm i'm gonna make this course
very special it's my baby i'm gonna give
you everything i have to help you in
your daily career
so
i i really appreciate all you guys i
hope to see you guys in the course if
you have any questions at all today
please let me know um i'm very excited i
guess before before i do hop off i do
want to say
um i do want to say let's see hold on
i don't want to say thanks to some
people who joined i was having trouble
seeing all of them but let me try
david did i see your name did i see your
name maybe i did
i haven't had a chance to really look at
my phone yet
um so
let me see
let's see so
let's see
so let's see so we have
christopher jones stoked for christopher
tim joined
uh ao joined janesh joined
those are um
sandy joins xavin you joined david i'm
stoked to have you
eliza joined thank you eliza brian joins
thank you for joining brian stoke to
have you
um joined
beside i know shaban was active in the
chat excited to have you
so
um i lost my internet connection
for a second there uh let's see
betty joined very talked about that
stoked to have betty
all right so
hopefully
we get some uh some extra people to join
too throughout the day
like i said looks like we still have
some room for that uh
extra call but i'm gonna go ahead and
hop off right now and i'll catch you
guys later once again send me a message
if you need one hope you guys enjoyed
this session and i hope to see you guys
in data crew jumpstart so like travis
says have a good day everyone
um y'all enjoy it okay
see you later over and out let me know
if i can help you in any way all right
bye-bye

Title: Building a Data Business with Lilian Pierson

Description: Come check out a live DATA CAREER PODCAST interview with data legend, Lilian Pierson. 

Lillian Pierson, P.E. helps data professionals evolve into world-class leaders and entrepreneurs. To date she‚Äôs educated over 1 Million data professionals on AI and data science. Over 10% of the data entrepreneurs we‚Äôve mentored have landed 6-figure contracts within the first 7-months of signing up.

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hello everyone hope you're having a
splendid thursday i know i am because i
am joined today uh by lillian pearson
lillian welcome to the data career
podcast thank you so much for having me
avery and i like your introduction
that's really cool you're great with
your branding
thanks i i i like the song and i like
the intro and i that voice you actually
hear
is like a
computer generated voice i found like
this website that like you can type
anything you want and it'll like
speak it any way you want you can choose
like a bunch of different accents and
uh
different uh
yeah
it was awesome um okay i just got a
notification let's see okay um all right
so for those who don't know lillian you
definitely should know lillian uh
lillian pearson pe helps data
professionals
evolve into world-class leaders and
entrepreneurs to date she's educated
over 1 million data professionals on ai
and data science over 10 of the data
entrepreneurs we've mentored have landed
six-figure contracts within the first
seven months of signing up so lillian is
a data entrepreneur expert and someone a
great resource to know in the data field
so
lillian we're so glad to have you here
thank you so much for joining us we
really appreciate it
sure thing thank you for having me on i
was um sorry uh while you're introducing
me i was trying to pull pull up the
episode so that i could help take
questions while we're actually talking
but yes
attention
yes no you're good it actually
it's
stream yard just sent me a notification
we're having some trouble streaming to
linkedin this may be an issue on
linkedin keep trying let it know it's
resolved please check linkedin
oh okay
let me see
i've never had this happen before but
let me try it let's see what happened
let me see if i can see it it says
waiting for a broadcast
interesting oh you misspelled my name
did i really it's okay
oops sorry about that
um let's see hold on give me a second
let's see so no one
i'm i'm broadcasting to youtube at the
same time but no one's okay let's just
go with it we'll just
go with it yeah
are you sure cause hold on let me see if
i can fix it yeah i mean i don't want
you to mess up your youtube broadcast oh
it's 100 fine don't worry about it let's
just try one more time
most people end up listening
uh on the podcast anyways versus live
but let me see if i can fix it let's try
it's weird it's like stuck it says
waiting
yeah i see that let me try doing this
and that and if you get comments over on
youtube i could just look over there i
guess
yeah but um actually if you've uh if you
see in the top right of stream yard
there's that button that says comments
all the comments pop up here so you
don't even have to watch
okay okay never mind well no you're good
let me let me try removing this though
and then re-adding it because it's fun
to be on um
live hold on
delete on linkedin
move
weird oh it doesn't like that for now
you'll need to go to linkedin and delete
the stream there
usually
remove
okay let me try one more time
remove okay and then add
and i can add
okay
save
okay i think i think we're actually i
think i fixed it hopefully let's see
if not we can just restart and get going
um
it doesn't matter
well let's let's do it live here oh wait
hold on i think it's actually here
okay oh yeah we're here we're good we're
good we're good sorry about that all
right we're back everyone we'll we'll
cut that out of the podcast um
sorry i had some technical difficulties
but now we should be live on linkedin uh
stream yard my streaming service wasn't
working properly but now we're back and
we have lillian pearson if you missed
the introduction so lillian welcome to
the podcast thank you thanks for having
me on avery yes and i'm gonna reread
your bio just so that everyone who's
watching live um and when i cut this in
the podcast it'll be in there so lillian
pearson pe helps data professionals
evolve into world-class leaders and
entrepreneurs today she's educated over
1 million data professionals on ai and
data science over 10 percent of the data
entrepreneurs that she has mentored has
landed six figure six-figure contracts
within the first seven months of working
with lillian so lillian is a great
resource to have in the data community
um definitely a good person that you
want to follow and check out for uh all
things data especially data
entrepreneurship so lillian we're so
lucky to have you here thank you for
thank you for inviting me and i love
what you're doing with your podcast and
with your community i've seen a lot of a
lot of my friends a lot of really
awesome data professionals and leaders
um being a guest on your show so thank
you i'm honored that you would invite me
yeah of course we got some people here
saying hello we got ken g
stopping by to say hello you were the
one i was thinking of go to say i saw
your picture like two days ago yeah so i
actually i was on ken's podcast but i
still need to get ken on this podcast
ken's awesome we had a really fun
discussion
about i have a bunch of stuff so
definitely if you guys don't follow ken
on youtube definitely give him a follow
on youtube great resource to follow he
can
got some other people
oh peru i used to i lived there for six
months
oh you did that's really cool
yeah yeah it was cool yeah that's
awesome we got hamanteer we got siraj
here
i actually started writing data science
for dummies in peru
oh really that's really cool
and in sacred valley of all places
that's awesome and we're gonna we're
gonna get into that because you know
travel's been a big part of your
professional life hasn't it it has i
finally got to the yeah i got to the
point where i wanted to like bring my
business fully online because the travel
part was just like you know with a child
it's just too much
yeah for sure that that is a lot so
we're going to talk about all of that
thank you guys all for joining us this
morning
um yes hello from qatar that's far away
s mita hello
[Music]
david also says
you're definitely american you're like
100
all-american
tell me why what's your thoughts
i think you just like qatar
um that's far like you the way you say
like that's far away like i i don't know
like i was thinking i could have been to
qatar
but you were like just you just remind
me of american like my family back home
like what
i am 100 american i i will give you that
um wow we got a lot of people watching
today we got people from south africa
watching
hello
bongani sorry if i said your name wrong
emmanuel
um sweet well thank you guys all for
joining lillian's a great person to come
join too so like
i'm stoked for you guys all to be here
um i to get to get the scene started i
actually wanted to read this clip off
your site lillian
this is kind of a little bit about your
story that i i find super fascinating so
it says back in 2011 which is like only
10 years ago i was an engineer working
as a legal secretary in orlando florida
for eight dollars an hour 40 hours per
week although i had engineering job plus
engineer or plus interns license plus
three years of professional experience i
was unable to find another job in the
field up until this point i'd follow
every rule and cleared every obstacle
with respect to my engineering career
and its advancement
so i want to ask you here you are
working in florida as a legal secretary
you have an engineering degree what
happens next and how 10 years later do
you have a data empire what
did what did you do
to to get to that point
um
okay well
i think the thing is is that i just kept
trying and so like the futility of
putting in you were at the part about
600 resumes and not getting a job right
yes but but tell our listeners all about
that experience they want to know
well i just okay so i had gotten this
job i went to law school i wanted to
become a patent attorney because i just
was kind of
under stimulated with civil
environmental engineering you went to
law school
yeah i did for a year like i went for
like a year and a half i didn't know
that yeah and i got a job as a legal
secretary and then i found out
i don't want to work with lawyers for
the rest of my life like i don't like
arguing
i like
logic but not arguing
so uh
so i decided you know with the cost of
like it was a good education but um i
quit the law school and then i tried to
get back into engineering and
um it was that there was the downturn of
the economy due to the housing vocal
collapse so there was no money
um for municipalities to
build infrastructure like water systems
and sewer systems and people were not
building things so there weren't any
jobs
you know but that's what i did so i just
like kept putting in the resume and um
i i got this job for like eight bucks an
hour at a law firm like that was owned
by a friend and i was a legal secretary
and i worked you know to cover my
mortgage
and um then
every day after work i would go in and
just put in cvs for an environmental
engineering job
and
you know
and i just did it because that's just
what you do right i didn't know anything
about
like i didn't know anything about like
linkedin or like
you know getting all savvy with job
search because i just never had to do
that i always just had a job whenever i
had a degree so i was thought like you
just put in a resume and you get a job
but it didn't work that way for me so
like
um
when i went to bolivia
i was so that winter i already had a
trip planned to
peru and to bolivia and i still kept
putting in job resumes and stuff while i
was traveling and i just like it
occurred to me uh i think it was
christmas day in bolivia i was like this
hostel in the paws
sitting on the floor and i just thought
about it i was like actually because the
cost of living is so low here and i have
renters in my house
paying me money
i'm actually
making
more money per day here not having a job
doing anything that i was in america
working 40 hours a week
and then you know an extra 20 hours
putting in cds so i just decided i'm
like well i don't really want to like
i don't really want a job anyway
you know i really want to just travel
the world and kind of like follow
whatever it is that i want to work on
right so i just decided that hey i'm
gonna
i'm just gonna start my own business
online
and
you know it can't be
you can't go down from where i was at
yeah you know so i just made that
decision but then i just so happened to
get
like that same day i was putting in a cv
like i had already put it in or
something like that i was in the process
so i just put it in and i got that job
so i went back to america and i and i um
and i worked for like two years i got my
pe license i got qualified i for that
you know it's my professional
engineering license you need to qualify
for four years of work experience before
you can sit for the exam
so at
this point let me sorry to interrupt but
at this point you don't have any family
you're not married or are you married
no no i just not really my family's
pretty all independent so it just makes
me
okay just you that's that's one thing
that's i've always wanted to like work
remotely but uh my wife like loves
people like i'm a very big introvert but
she's a huge extrovert
i i know i i fake it till i make it but
i i like i get energy by being by myself
and being alone and like me too yeah so
i just don't like being with people my
wife does and she would we've talked
about like moving to like mexico or
something like that she's like i would
just miss everyone so much and i'm like
i wouldn't miss them at all but that's
one thing that's hard
we have these people we have that type
of person here too where i live and they
do fine i mean they just really they
just find each other so that's cool hey
danny oh you guys are nice
he had two legends coming from a legend
himself if i say so
um yeah thanks for stopping by danny
appreciate it um okay and the other
thing i wanted to ask you is okay so
you're in bolivia you get this job is
this an engineering job or is this a
data job at this point it was a g it was
a job
um a gis specialist job
oh and that that that counts that
counted towards your pe license i didn't
realize that they they let it count
because what i ended up doing was i
the guy that i worked for government so
it was community environmental and
development services so and i was doing
like i was like
doing data analytics and i ended up
doing data science to like help them
find um suitable
site suitability analysis
and a lot of things that fall within the
civil and environmental domain
so the title gis specialist is what it
was but when i came in that's not
actually what i was doing it was just
because it was government that was the
title they had for me and i also have a
ton of experience and so they took it
okay that's that's awesome okay so
that's very cool so anyway sorry to go
back to your story you leave bolivia you
come back to the us
um you get this job as a gis specialist
which is like
for those who don't know what that is
that has a lot to do with um like
you're we're talking like space like not
space but like you're talking about maps
we're talking about basically
intelligence that is involved with
locations is that correct yeah so
spatial geographic data geographic data
yeah so i ended up doing a bunch of like
um because i wanted to become a data
scientist when i got into that role and
they put me in charge of a data
analytics program but that didn't
require programming
um so i like found i needed to get
educated so i found you know kind of
like i saw in one of your messages the
other day of like find a way to make an
opportunity for yourself so i was like
yeah just um if you can get me trained
in like
if you can pay for the training and give
me time to learn
python and r
and spatial statistics then i can you
know build out these robust like
programs for you and i can build these
tools to like make things easier for you
and so they basically paid for all that
and then
um
and then i got the experience and
training i needed to
i mean i hate the i even hate the word
data scientist because it's such a
debated term but i did data science so
like whatever i love it i love it i i
always say that like
people are like people think and the
names kind of go this way that you have
to be a data scientist to do data
science
that's like saying you have to be a
mathematician to do math and it's like
no there's engineers there's account
like everyone uses math and like
everyone has the opportunity to use data
science if they're trained properly so i
totally agree with you there um
i do want to pause for one moment there
because one thing that you said really
struck me um is you were at this job and
you basically gained a lot of the skills
a lot of the knowledge a lot of the
training on the job is that correct
yeah and i knew i wanted to start my own
business because i had decided in
bolivia so i started building my brand
and getting clients while i was working
and they were cool with that they were
like oh well okay that works with you
know they were just like happy to have
me doing that so
that's that's an awesome employer that's
what everyone who's listening you
definitely want an employer that will
treat you like that
yeah but you know i made like i think in
take-home pay i made like 24 bucks an
hour
i mean not not the most especially for
you know the data science space but but
also you got to think this is this is
something
it's
hourly it's a thousand bucks
yeah obviously because the davis skills
expertise is worth that you know yeah so
a lot has changed though of course yeah
but still 24 bucks an hour in the united
states is like
for data for engineers and data
scientists people doing programming for
you data science
that's like solo but it was government
so you know i went with it and it paid
the bills and it allowed me to build my
brand so i could then quit the oh i got
my p.e qualified so
i i'm grateful i'm so grateful but yeah
maybe maybe not the most
the the highest financial compensation
but one thing that i try to tell people
and my students that i work with is you
need to figure out a way how to get paid
to learn and that's what you did at that
job right like you didn't have to stop
working you didn't have to go take a
master's you didn't have to pay you know
25 grand for a boot camp instead you
were getting paid 24 an hour to improve
your skills and it sounds like they were
even paying for some of the training so
people were here for the training they
gave me the time and they gave me the
practice like here he built this for me
so
yeah it was great that that's true it
was almost like kind of like an
internship or something but
you know looking back i'm just like i
needed to get out of there you know like
i didn't need to stay sure because it
was never going to take me like higher
you know we weren't going places inside
of the county
no yeah and that and that makes sense
and one thing that i think you did very
well with is
is um
is you had kind of like this escape plan
i always i always try to tell people to
drive defensively in their career and
you were like okay this job kind of
sucks i'm not gonna stay here a long
time so what is my escape plan what is
my route out of this situation how do i
set myself up for
and you you were success that up while
you were currently working
yeah after not having been able to find
another job you know i knew i knew that
like it isn't like
you know to be honest to be fair like
when i came out of college i kind of
thought when you got the degree that
that was like you had arrived
yeah
i didn't realize that that's like the
beginning and then you need to like
freaking
haul ass for like the rest of your
career like that you didn't arrive so um
yeah so i learned the lesson the hard
way and so when i got this low paying
awesome job i really pushed pushed my
career like everything i started a
meetup group on big data that was like
2012. i did everything i could possibly
do i read every like article and like
whatever it was
like anything and everything to
grow to build my brand as a data
professional and to build that
opportunities and to demonstrate that i
was there to add value and i knew what
that actually meant
yeah
yeah and and it it seems like it worked
out like all that all that extra work
turned into something great because then
like facebook and all these people were
trying to recruit me from like the
county cubicle and i was like this is so
bizarre because like
you know to go from like
sitting on a floor in bolivia in a dusty
hostel like putting in 600 cvs and not
being able to like any responses so like
having facebook be like hey can you like
come and like we got this data position
and then low park like that is a big
reversal
yeah that's huge what what what do you
think made the difference like why all
this like the sudden change
i think it was plus i
not only the skills
but developing my brand and contributing
online and like
um
demonstrating
expertise and thought leadership at the
capacity that i had then
yeah you know which is now of course
different it's evolved
yeah but i mean how how cool is that
that basically
data skills and a personal brand you
know transformed your life like it
really like pretty quickly too like it
was not like really quickly it was crazy
yeah that was like
what
because you know to go from like putting
in 600 resumes and not getting a job to
like having facebook be like hey oh
we'll wait for you that's craziness it's
silicon valley like i was like
like living in a cubicle
it was weird
yeah it was awesome
so so why didn't you take the facebook
job tell me about that
because it was uh i didn't move on into
interviews or the second interview
because i already
had a plan to move to thailand and start
my own business and i knew
i knew what i was going to get was more
like going into an office being around
competitive people who really want
everyone wants to
usurp the next person and like having to
like really i was just ready for a break
honestly
and i was tired you know i had like
built this business
quasi business and like
gotten my pe license and held a
full-time job and i was like
going and working in silicon valley
right now is definitely not
what um
there were so many reasons and also they
just don't really pay that well compared
to the cost of living i was like
dude i'm gonna have like less money
there than i do here and i only make 24
bucks an hour because the cost of living
so i'm just like no i'm just gonna move
to thailand and i just lived off the 600
a month and i just chilled
you know and i didn't
and then i got a book deal so
i don't know like so then i just kept
going i i liked it i mean uh it makes
sense obviously california is very
expensive obviously um for those who
haven't been to thailand
you know thailand's
awesome very expensive super affordable
um beautiful place awesome weather
um so yeah i mean i guess if you're like
okay
i can like have more
you know disposable money at my hands
living in a tropical you know paradise
doing my own thing versus you know kind
of in the office in california estate
taxes and all that stuff no i couldn't
do that yeah i needed to sleep and like
get massages and just like freaking
and also i had enough money i knew like
with the amount of clients i had and i
didn't have kids that honestly and i had
some money and savings i was like i
think i have enough money i was i it was
kind of like yeah i'm going into my own
business but it was also kind of
retirement
because i didn't need to make money so i
kind of just retired
and i just did some like little
freelance things on the side
um
but i didn't need to make the money
because it was so affordable
it needless to say i didn't get that far
with my business
like
but like i had a lot of fun and i
traveled the world and i got a lot of
cool contracts all over the world and
but the business i didn't start growing
the business really like seriously until
my i found out i was pregnant
um
then you know it's like
okay you're responsible for setting an
example for another human being and like
what is a quote like decent quality of
life and like stability and like
education and like you can't just be
like my husband calls it flying sausage
just like willy-nilly all over the world
just like whatever you can't do that and
be a good parent i don't i don't for me
i couldn't it wasn't yeah
so um
yeah so then that's when i started like
2016 is when i started like
waking up and being like okay i actually
need to
get off my butt with this business here
and do something
yeah and scale it up how did how did you
do that like what what does that involve
like after you got off
your butt like what did you do
um well i first took a course
um
on
i took this course called like pilot
the pilot project or something and it
was like kind of like business coaching
but it was just a course and it was
pretty cheap
um
and it didn't
teach me you know it wasn't like
revolutionary or anything but it did
help me start like systemizing my
business and start like looking at my
numbers every month and you know and i
just i started working with different
coaches and mentors then
um and like just working on my business
so the data expertise has always been
something that has
i don't spend a lot of time learning
things just for the sake of learning
them in fact i spend almost no time
doing that
so the data expertise has my data
expertise has developed with my client
work with whatever my requirements are i
need to learn something you know so i've
developed that as i go but like in order
to grow the business i had to
so i've spent over fifty thousand
dollars on
business coaching and business mentors
just in the last
i don't know three four years
um and it's worth it
you know i'm gonna keep
i love that because um like you said a
lot of a lot of people myself included
were like oh
i got my undergrad like i'm ready for
the world you know and what it comes
down to is like your undergrad kind of
teaches you nothing about the real world
um
and so there's all these like
alternative ways to get educated you
know like these courses these
mentorships um these coaching programs
and people sometimes are like uh i don't
that's not that's not like a degree why
do i need that but often like they're
more useful than the actual degree
because they teach you like how to apply
stuff in real life and like skills that
really the education system just doesn't
teach they're so valuable and people
just aren't talking about that
necessarily oh my gosh i see these
things where it's like some dude
teaching an mba program like i saw
something somewhere like oh he went to
harvard for nba he's teaching in
teaching get mba in harvard or something
that's great there's not i think mbas
are great for people who are going to
run corporations
but um if a person was that badass at
business
then they probably wouldn't be
teaching mba they would probably be
sitting on a beach somewhere chilling
because they made enough money and they
don't have to actually work you know
what i'm saying like no one's going to
be going into an office every single day
teaching if they know if they are so
good with business and how to make money
you know what i mean so like
like so i'm not going to give out too
many
secrets but so my my
business mentor has
grown
ten businesses passed seven figures some
of them into eight figures
um all before it was 30 and helped
hundreds of other entrepreneurs hit
million dollars in their business so
like okay so we don't have mbas but like
it doesn't really matter because if
you've got the street smarts to actually
make the money who cares who went to
college for what because you're chilling
on a beach somewhere doing what you want
right
that i mean that's that's the goal like
the
i like that i mean that's that's the
goal um did you always want to start a
business
i think i was always entrepreneurial
um but i didn't know that i wanted i or
yes i was always into finding ways to
make money but
um i didn't know i wanted to start a
business at all
um until i think it was chris gillabo
actually
do you know chris gillabo i don't who's
that
um he wrote this book
um
100 startup back in
2012 and we were kind of friends
and he just basically traveled he he was
on a mission to travel to every country
in the world so 196 countries by the
time he's 35 and he's never had a real
job
you know and
he did get an mba but he never had a
real job
and so he taught
he would tell these stories and he
taught about people who travel the world
you know like you do all your work on
the plane and then when you get to hong
kong and you open your laptop all your
work goes out and like paint this
picture of like a life
that i didn't know was possible and i
was like oh that's like what it could be
like running owning your own business is
just like
traveling anywhere you want and
not answering if you're working with
whoever you want and not working with
anyone you don't want once i knew that
that was a possibility because he opened
my eyes to that and shared stories of
other people who also lived that way
then i knew yeah i want to have my own
business this is it
um that's a cool story and what sounds
like a cool guy um do you think you
would have been able to start your own
business had you not got into data
let's say like you don't get that job
you don't get the gis you know yeah of
course really you would what in
engineering what do you think you would
have done i'm curious
um
okay with an engineering degree
so there was all sorts of things so i
got a job in data and it was like a
natural it was just like a natural fit
and it was a perfect time it was like
the stars aligned
um but
you can do anything if you have an
engineering degree like okay if you
don't do data you could do
you could be a web developer you could
be
you could do anything it's like the the
i the the possibilities are endless in
fact i would love although i don't have
the background i would love to be a
designer
when i retire one day because i love
design web design you know um
you guys you guys need to check out
lillian's website it's it's very i like
the design i do it but it's i like it
well i know that you had a say in it
that's for sure the palettes and
everything i feel like i feel she's so
talented i didn't have to like you
didn't have to say anything it's a very
good looking website i'll give you that
thank you
um that i i asked that question because
i i agree with you like one thing i you
know we we've talked a little bit in the
past but not a ton um and one thing i've
noticed about you is you're a great
marketer you know you're you're great at
branding you're great at marketing and
so i i think sometimes
as you know people who are like oh i
want to start a business you're like
okay what what do i need to do you know
and we think a little bit less okay how
do i need to like position myself how do
i need to market myself um and you know
that's that's high in demand it's a big
deal like like it's actually
sometimes you can have like a crappy
product but if you can market it well it
doesn't really really matter you know
and so anyways my point of asking you
term that's not gonna do people are it's
not gonna work
can i share something with you though
before i picked okay so when i decided i
want to start my own business and i got
that job so i was kind of like teetering
between two ideas travel business or
data business
and the data thing just took off
and the travel thing i wrote a book even
and then i realized i have to market it
and then i realized that this doesn't
make sense because it's just too broad
of a market and it's too much work so
the market but my whole idea was just
basically like how do you travel the
world for free
and do whatever you want and i wrote a
book about it well guess what one of the
girls that started
um working in one of my the programs
that i'm in lately she got laid off like
four months ago
and she was her whole mission is
teaching people to just basically travel
the how they can travel the world and
luxuriously or whatever and like on like
a shoestring budget if not free that's
her idea which was exactly what i was
thinking and she got laid off from her
job and within four months she had
brought in four hundred thousand dollars
how
she she just launched and like she just
well that's why you work with business
mentors because they can tell you yeah
they can tell you how
yeah it's like it's always like look
that idea that i thought was too
saturated that i'd never get anywhere
with it she took something like that
and informed you know what i'm saying
and like yeah
so it's the the mentors mentor's worth
it because that's that's kind of the
difference maker there right is is
having a good mentor and some people are
like oh but i could learn this stuff for
free on youtube or something like that
it's like it's like sometimes that's
true but also like it can take you years
to find the right thing like mentorships
you're kind of paying for that's why
yeah i wasted i did that when i was kind
of like
my you know not taking my business
seriously i just like oh copying like oh
this looks like it seems like it's cool
and like doing something over here that
someone's doing like trying to copy what
they're doing because it seems like it's
cool
and trying to figure it out on my own
with like whatever not really wanting to
spend any money because i thought
everything was too expensive which
i didn't realize so i spent wasted four
years doing that
and then
if you take the amount of money i
started making when i started working
with business coaches
versus the four years i wasted
doing things like whatever youtube
videos are just wasting my time on stuff
like trying to figure it out on my own
it because because i was smart i thought
i was like oh i'm smart i lost 800
000 and lost earnings money that
immediately i started making once i knew
what i was doing that i could have made
before if i hadn't had tried to save
money by being smart and figure it out
on my own
yeah kind of counterproductive huh
yeah like i look at it and i'm like no i
don't need to try and figure anything
out like i just
i i don't know teetered between like
you do have to be careful who you work
with because not everyone has your best
intentions and in mind was what i found
but
in general
it really helps to have um get proven
strategy from someone who's done it
before rather than trying to figure it
out yeah that i mean you're you're
paying for experience paying for
knowledge you're paying for
the shortcut so i i like it um
that's very cool
um so now like we've talked a lot about
about your business and you know this
this thing that you've kind of built up
over the last you know eight years ten
years um
what what exactly do you spend most your
time doing today and what do you like to
spend your time doing uh what do you
enjoy most about your business
oh thank you for asking
um
okay well so this year i had to rewrite
my book data science for dummies
and
also i was remaking a course
so i spent all year
developing
like writing a book and
developing con the writing of the book
was very it's very heavy and like
energetically it just drains me but i'm
very excited about the content because
the content's completely original is not
i don't even read what other people
write because i don't want it to
influence like my perspective and what i
share in my content
um
so i'm excited about the book but it
wasn't it's not it was not the most
exciting
uh way to spend
seven months
i could imagine
yeah um and then now i'm back in my
business and we're gonna we're preparing
for some launches and
i really love product development and
um
managing my team like putting the pieces
together of like managing
all the projects and putting all the
pieces together and delegating and
fitting them all together and kind of
just making it all happen
but not actually like
implementing because the implementing
part is like actually the work for me
yeah
so i prefer just like hiring people and
then like putting it all together and i
like um i think that
i like creating content for people i
like creating programs like that when i
know i'm creating something where i'm
looking at where someone's at and taking
them through a journey to like get them
where they want to go
and like all the pieces and parts that
need you know to take them there that
and when envisioning like what we're
building that stuff just has me on fire
okay so that's that's what you like the
most is is like coming up with programs
that help people transformate transform
from a to b
yeah yeah and then like like envision
like creating visions for what we're
doing with things and i also
like thinking about
well i like a lot about like business
mindset uh stuff and i also like
thinking about biopsychology
um and what like where people are at
like at the different touch points where
they're coming to me
from
and like what it is like understanding
what it is
that they need versus what they want and
how to like
help them see a solution or basically
you know understanding people i really
like understanding people whether or not
they become a claim because i'm more
than happy to say like i just told this
dude no
save nine thousand dollars and don't
don't join private coaching because i
don't think
you're the you know i think that this
other thing is going to be more in
alignment with your
you know what you're trying to do like
you can read someone's vibe and i just
really want to like get in touch with
people like
not just their hearts but
their passions and help people get in
touch with that
and then help them become
i don't want to say better version of
themselves because that's
totally um over whatever
to reach their potential reach their
potential
yeah to see to help people that part of
it where like i see someone where
they're at
and then i get to like help them become
reach their dreams and what be part of
that is just so incredible
yeah i can imagine that's uh very
fulfilling and and very
uh very fun to see people you know
change change their lives in all in all
honesty that that's what i'm so excited
you know like
i remember how freaking
i still feel this way every day riding
my bike around thailand like when i left
america i felt so free you know i felt
so like
you know like
so much just like joy and peace and like
all of these things that i wanted and so
like i know what it is to like reach the
next level and just be like wow this is
possible for me and it's not just me
it's possible for like these are just
these are proven like the things that
teach people are proven methods so it's
possible for anyone that's gonna do is
willing to do the work then they have
access to like you think
you know to go from not being able to
get a job and being in a hostel in
bolivia to like
being flown all over the world to make
like
one time it was like 10 grand for an
hour i mean it's just crazy you know and
it's not like
i'm anyone special because
i didn't go to harvard or anything like
that
yeah wow super super incredible um
amazing do you miss anything about about
the us
um
maybe shopping
shopping all right
that's fair well what do you like yeah
go ahead sorry yeah i really like my
husband's home country probably because
i'm not that he's russian i really like
russia
i like going there a lot america is
great but
i have a totally different perspective
on america now because i was born there
in orlando and after having traveled all
over the old world and seen like
the
civilizations they've been building and
protecting for thousands of years i
realized that i was basically born in a
social experiment
in like i was born in like disney world
it wasn't like no like
in fact my family was on like i have
relatives a relative that was on the
mayflower
and other family members were in america
back to like 1500s so
it's not like
we just showed up there or anything like
that but it's still so shallow compared
to
other cultures
i understand that i understand that it
makes sense what do you like most about
thailand
oh gosh
i think the best thing about thailand
for me is
um there's so many things but i think
it's the people
um because the vibe is very much like
you know the buddhists they're buddhist
they're peaceful they're happy they're
not stressed about anything they're just
laying and just eating there's enough
you don't have to worry if you don't
want to make money like there's fruit
you can just eat off of the fruits of
the trees there's not people are like
killing each other here none of that so
like as a type a which i am kind of i
gotta say like i have to work on myself
not to be
a bit neurotic and totally type a
so
you know to be in an environment where
there's water buffalo wandering around
and
people are just chilling it really helps
me not to be like 100 of the time like
focused on the wrong things like my own
ambitions when really there's a greater
i'm very much have faith in god you know
there's a greater purpose there's a
greater
force behind the work i'm doing and my
plans are pretty shabby compared to
you know what could happen if i just let
that happen and so this environment
helps me to kind of stop trying to be
such a control freak
i i love it that's very cool um when i
visited it was it was very peaceful i
mean anytime you have have a beach but
especially in thailand i felt like the
beaches were very peaceful um very
beautiful we we did some hiking it was
it was very peaceful very very beautiful
as well so what what a cool place what a
cool place to live um
do you have do you have like i guess any
any plans to leave anytime soon you stay
in there for the long haul you love it
we just had to pay for another visa for
me so it's for 15 years oh wow
there you go we don't have um
vaccines so i can't go anywhere so we'll
just i mean maybe it's stuck in paradise
yeah literally it's on the billboards
here but
it kind of took a lot of it felt like i
don't know when i realized i don't have
to leave thailand for 15 years
i was like wow like i have money set up
for in case i um you know you're
supposed to keep six months of expenses
and yeah so i have
because i'm american i just want to
always be and an engineer i want to be
conservative so i have enough money
saved up for six months of u.s if i was
running my business in the u.s
and i'm like hey i could actually invest
that money some of it now because
why i'm not going to be i'm not going i
don't have to go to the us
yeah that that's cool what what like i
said what a cool place to to be
to be stuck in and uh enjoy like i i
love when i visited i loved the food the
people were very kind um the massages
were awesome
uh
the uh
we we got to see monkeys we got to see
elephant like very cool obviously very
different from the us so so what a cool
place where where people can find you um
okay last question for you what what's
what's next in in lillian's life what
where are you what are you doing this
year how can people reach you um what
are you excited about
um i'm super excited we're we're
relaunching so right now we're reopening
my data creatives and co program and
then i am starting a new mentorship
program
and then um
i think that'll be enough for i don't
know
yeah this should probably be enough for
the rest of the year and then next year
i'm going to be coming out with a
workshop a few workshops like really
affordable workshops
um to start working with people so this
is all for data entrepreneurs um or
people who are
data freelancers and data entrepreneurs
um so that's what the goals are for the
business also a book launch
um
there's a lot of things but i have team
members i like delegate i delegate a lot
so
um i those are what on my mind and then
the rest of the year is that and then
you asked about yeah and then just
chilling you know
that's awesome
it doesn't it doesn't sound like you're
that sounds like a lot
it doesn't sound like chilling but i'm
sure
oh it's so much less i got a business
best friend yeah i got i started
business best friends with this one
woman and she's at 3 million a year in
revenue
and so i was like okay cool this is
awesome like i can learn from her and
stuff and then i told her my plans you
know and how i felt about them which i
wasn't feeling that excited i was
feeling like
i want to quit my business because i
piled on like
it was like 10
12 weeks of launching
for the rest of the it was like it was
just like so heavy so much work so much
work just trying to get as much done as
quickly as possible it's just like why
do you do that why don't you just do
one at a time
you know and just like work so i'm
working like 20 30 hours a week
and just chilling and like i'll just get
get to it when the time is right and
remaining open and that is
yeah i love it that's awesome that's
that's a great place to be well that's
that's super awesome we're all excited
to see
all these things that are coming out
we're excited for the data science for
dummies
thank you um and thank you so much for
coming on the podcast really appreciated
talking to you and getting to know you
better and uh
hearing your story it's it's it's a fun
story so i'm i'm really glad for
everyone who was here
my wife's name haley
okay you and haley i know you were here
before but
i mean if you ever thought of like
coming back again man because i it's a
nature's paradise and also we have a lot
of people here that are people people
and they like run things
around here and they know everyone and
they talk and i have just a few friends
like that and i get all my information
from those people so i'm just saying
that she's got a place as well
sweet thank you i appreciate you're in
kosamui right
yeah that that's one place that we
actually didn't get to go to that we
kind of wanted to go to um we were we
were kind of debating we we ended up
going to bangkok and then kopipi and
then uh chiang mai um those were kind of
our three places city right and then you
kind of have the beach in gopipi and
then kind of like the mountains in in
chiang mai but we were thinking about ko
samui so it would be awesome to come
back hopefully after all this coveted
stuff goes away and go to koh samui i i
love thailand i love thai food i would
just go to eat the food do nothing else
i love pad thai i love curry i love
papaya salad i i love thai food so i'd
go back just for food
well they're here there's plenty of food
and not enough people to eat it not
enough tourists to eat it so you can get
a lot of good thai food for cheap thank
you david it's the third edition
can i say avery that i'm so excited
about the books coming out and but it's
data science for dummies but it's
actually
for data like even if you are an expert
data scientist
only a portion of it is like the basic
stuff that most everyone is covering
you know i took i minimized that because
it just didn't need to be like it's just
could be condensed so it's actually
about data strategy and data
monetization and building data
businesses and like data careers so it's
data science but it's so people that
even if you worked in a data as a data
scientist for 10 years there's so much
in there it's like about data
monetization and about like data
businesses the perspective of growing
this type of business that i'm so
excited for to get out there
because i know that like
i know it's a you know i know it's
original like no one is saying this
because it like literally came from like
the fusion of the things that i have
learned along the way between doing
being a data professional and growing a
business
so
i'm excited about that to to be able to
like share that knowledge
with other data professionals and feel
like i feel actually like proud for the
first time ever because it's not just
like
here's this this and this is this and
this is this
which is
i guess helpful at the beginning but
then you know once you know it you know
it but it's more like okay
here's why this actually matters and
this is how you can use it to like
change your company change the world
build your own business build some you
know it's fun
that that's awesome when does it come
out
um september
wow that's soon
yeah i'm so excited and they invited me
like
hot pink
hot we're gonna have like this yeah it's
a hot pink dummies book and we have like
a whole website to go with it and
there's all sorts of free resources for
like data strategy and building your own
data business like i went all out
because you know it's my name on there
so yeah i freaking didn't i left no
stone unturned and trying to like just
give
value and none of it is like
something that like i read somewhere
else and
decided oh that needs to go in here
that's awesome um
what so um
i'll have the the link to the i know
you're having a launch party i'll have
the link to the launch party um in the
show notes on the podcast data
monetization i know i love data
monetization it's so it's fascinating
huh um where can people buy i guess i
guess that link that you gave me that's
where people can you get you get on the
launch party list and then from the
launch party people can have links to
buy at the launch party and stuff like
that
yeah when it gets open we'll have
something they'll have it on amazon i'm
not sure how we'll fit we'll get it all
going i've got a launch manager right
now okay cool planning everything but i
just have um inside that at that website
there's
we're putting in a ton of like free
content and resources some of them from
my paid programs um that i have archived
so they're like there's gonna be like
free products in there that i used to
sell i'm now giving away for free and
like this is the website and there's
gonna be a lot i just
have people helping me so um
they're building it now
all right well sweet i'm signing up
everyone you're so sweet you guys should
too that looks i like the pink too i
know most these books are yellow but you
had to have some lily and pink in there
huh
yeah it's like freaking pink and like
yeah because the future is female
yeah well
i'm tight i'm happy you know you know i
no longer have to
it was totally different it used to be
like you had to conform to like all this
now it's like oh we have a pink book
because females are also allowed to be
female and that doesn't mean that
they're less qualified and you know and
yeah you can use hyphenated words like
they'll instead of they will used to be
like so formal and now it's like okay
we're real people here we're not like
looking our nose down on anyone else and
like we're like here's we're at here you
know trying to meet people where they're
at and like help literally helping them
so it the whole
dummies brand has also
changed like they never used to let you
put like a website or anything so they
have like really adapted as well and
it's just so it's really nice
environment and i'm excited about it
well that is awesome stoked about that
definitely gonna check that out
um and uh yeah be sure everyone who's
listening on the podcast check out the
the show notes we have some other fun uh
free things from from lillian some free
trainings and some free
uh data career quizzes and stuff like
that so definitely check out the show
notes um
lillian anything else you want to say
before before we head
no i just want to say thank you
um for having me on that was really fun
and nice talking to you
yeah it was super fun having you i hope
everyone who's listening uh got
something out of it i know that i did um
definitely connect with lillian um she's
on
linkedin twitter instagram find her and
uh check out her website and and learn
from her because she's a great resource
to have so thank you everyone who joined
i know we had a lot of people on hamant
and ron
and
suraj
david i just requested you on linkedin
oh yeah david there you go signing up
right now so you guys can connect david
it's like yeah he might be building
something on linkedin learning as well
just looking at your contacts
perhaps you guys will have to connect
i love it
thank you so much elaine we'll talk
later all right thanks for having me
avery bye

Title: Interview With Greg Conquillo - Analytics in Business

Description: Live interview with Amazon Manager and LinkedIn Top Voice Greg Conquillo! We'll be talking about his path into data, why businesses should be data literate, and advice to data professionals.

#Data #DataScience

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hey everyone how is it going i hope you
are
doing very well um i am doing awesome
on this friday afternoon because i'm
here with
greg coquillo and he's awesome
greg welcome to the data career podcast
avery thank you so much for
uh having me and it's great to be here
with uh the audience it's an honor to be
here
and uh i'm happy to to talk about
everything data
or everything not data so uh thank you
for
uh inviting me in yeah of course
uh i'm so excited to have you here um i
was just posting yesterday on my
instagram i was like so excited to have
you um for those who don't know greg go
ahead and connect with him right now if
you're on linkedin
i'll give you a quick introduction to
who he is but you can you can tell
pretty quickly
how much value greg brings and how much
he knows based off of his linkedin
but greg cookio is constantly adding and
sharing value
to the data community he's currently
working as a technology manager amazon
where he helped shape their ai vision
and he was nominated as one of
linkedin's top voices in data science
and artificial intelligence
in 2020. he's an amazing person to
follow on linkedin as he's always
posting interesting content
and free guides so definitely want
to learn from greg he's a great resource
thank you everyone who's joining live i
saw that ron's here
um thanks for joining live ron everyone
else who's listening on the podcast
thank you for listening
and let's let's get right into it greg
how did you get into data because
you actually have a degree in industrial
engineering right
how did you end up falling into the into
the data world
yeah so uh you you said it right so uh i
guess i can say
what led me to industry engineering uh
being from a country in the caribbean
haiti to be more precise
i always wanted to uh bring industries
into a country like mine uh my home
country
and uh thinking about how to produce
a a product many times with consistency
was what led me to industrial
engineering now when it comes to
industrial engineering
the core of our specialty is to
optimize complex systems uh putting
these systems together
and optimizing them and that involves uh
including people money process
other smaller systems uh together and
for that you need data
uh you need data to to to optimize and
if you think about
uh this as a good segue into
uh uh what we call now uh data science
you know uh industrial engineers are
well positioned
to uh understand what the requirements
are it's just that me
uh from a career perspective i happen to
stick a little bit
more towards the business side of things
versus
being on the technical side uh which as
you know today
data scientists are more uh oriented
towards
yeah that's that's interesting because
you're totally right that
industrial engineering is not actually a
common degree i feel like i don't feel
like that many people
end up getting an industrial engineering
degree but an
industrial engineering degree is
actually one of the best degrees you
could possibly get
to to transfer into data science in my
opinion i mean did you feel like a lot
of your uh
the skills and the things you learned in
your your degree
have transferred i think so yes
absolutely it helped me
understand the technical side way better
now
we can i can go too deep into coding
requirements and things like that
however in the in the grim scheme of
things
uh what are we looking for when we put
systems together so
every data science projects is looking
to put a system together
and uh many times
so when it comes to supply and demand
type of thing so when the business show
up
with many use cases and data scientists
have to
find ways to keep up with these use
cases by
producing uh different models to keep up
with this demand so you have the supply
demand balance so
we are good at that for from a supply
chain perspective
uh you have optimization of systems uh
operations research
is another area where we excel so when
it comes to
optimizing for example uh tricks to
optimize
newer networks and things like that uh i
think industrial engineers can deep dive
and and get better at this and
easily understand uh these uh
models and uh how to uh
create best practices around optimizing
these systems
i think the whole idea about um anal ops
uh to me it's about um optimizing
pipelines uh delivering faster and
quicker those are the things that fall
under
you know continuous improvements and if
we talk
if we're talking about continuous
improvements we're talking to industrial
engineers
so in other words it's a matter of uh
where you want to focus
uh because uh one uh uh
i guess call out that i can make about
industrial engineering is that
it's so general right so it's uh we can
navigate everywhere
i can work at a hospital um minimizing
patient visits visit time
i can work at optimizing ambulance
routes
for a network of hospitals right so uh
to increase or reduce uh the travel time
when they are called i can work at the
at a bank
to uh minimize how long somebody has to
wait in line or something like that so
uh we could be at in manufacturing which
is where i started
um to uh predict or forecast
machine breakdowns uh and and create
some
uh maintenance program uh
you know you name it um i can set up
statistical controls to make sure i
reduce the effects
uh down the production line so we're
pretty much everywhere and we were
reversed
it's a matter of where do we want to
focus our attention to
uh so we can excel yeah you're so right
you guys are applied statistics in big
systems like you said
always always improving the process um i
guess
going going to your first job out of
college you said
that uh you were kind of or maybe not
first job out of college
but in the past you've you know you've
worked on manufacturing improvements
and stuff like that i'm also i got your
linkedin profile right here
i'm looking you also worked at avery
dennison for a while right
that's right that's right another av
yeah another avery the
the lesser avery the less cool avery but
uh
but yeah um like you said i'm just
looking at you know
the different places that you've worked
you've worked in so many different
industries
and that's one thing that's really cool
about you know data science and
you know in industrial engineering is
you're really
you don't necessarily have a domain your
domain is improving other people's
domains
using the power of data and the power of
stats which is which is like such a cool
job because
you could end up in so many different
industries in in your you know your
career which is which is so fun i think
you never never a dull moment am i right
that's correct that's right
and and that's why i i advise anyone to
really focus on understanding the
business model um
understanding the business model what is
the purpose what is the vision of that
business model
and also what are the pain points right
you're trying to to
to achieve um so once you have a good
understanding of that or
once you understand how to appeal the
audience and discover
issues you will have a nice bank of
project that you can work on by
leveraging data
so if you become a great inspector a
great interviewer
no need to be the subject matter expert
inside of a business but as a scientist
or a data scientist you need to be
very good at interviewing people and
surfacing
issues surfacing gaps or understanding
whether
uh data science can help or not and
things like that so those
those are the things that make data
centered
people very valuable and effective at
what they do
yeah i love that let's let's dive a
little bit deeper into that
um basically what i heard and correct me
if i'm wrong
but you're saying you like for instance
let's say you're a data scientist or
you're you know
i actually kind of hate that term data
scientist let's just say you're someone
who analyzes data you have you have data
analytics skills
um you can go to any industry and you
don't necessarily know how
no you don't necessarily know have to
know anything about that industry
what you said is you have to be a good
listener you have to be a good
interviewer
how like how do you develop those skills
because because what you're saying is
you don't like for instance
um i interviewed matt francis on my
podcast couple episode
episodes ago and his background is in
oil and gas
and he recently just uh started a new
job at kellogg's and now he deals with
you know
groceries and cereal what you're saying
is it doesn't matter that he has the oil
and gas background
he can learn all he needs to learn about
cereal and
the grocery stores by listening to other
people is that what you're saying
basically
that's that's correct so major uh just
about
any business ever uh has
a big picture process right so
they ingest uh an input
they make a transformation and they
create an output
that output is consumed by an entity or
an individual
uh who sees value uh in that input
so with that um comes you know
a business right that's what this is
usually business models or or
um built like this uh since
the history of humankind doing business
in the world right so we started in a
very
rudimentary practice which is banters
uh trading goods and things like that
but at the end of the day
you have to uh produce that good and
then
uh exchange it with someone else or uh
just uh exchange it with monetary uh
you know uh practices so in other words
um now you can start peeling the onion
uh in multiple areas but you have to
figure out
what you're trying to fix are you trying
to
get more clients more customers or
you're trying to make it easier for
customers to find these
transformed goods um or are you trying
to make
the transformational piece what
transforms the input
into the output are you trying to
optimize this make it more effective
you know you need to understand where
you are
and for that you need to find the
subject matter experts
in each of these areas and talk to them
and understand
uh what they're going through so you can
start taking these back
and create your project list prioritized
by impact and effort that you have to
put in there
and then figure it out right so uh you
become the subject matter expert by
interviewing the subject matter expert
and remember it's all about
building muscle memory you do it often
you build muscle memory in terms of how
to interview people
you get better and better at asking the
right questions
so all of that comes with practice
i i love that because you're totally
right i mean obviously this is a very
important skill
you have to know i often say on this
podcast
doing data science for data science sake
is stupid
we shouldn't do it it's it's dumb right
the only reason we should do data
science
is to improve business outcomes you know
to bring
value to the business because if i have
the world's let's say i made
the world's best neural net best neural
net in the world
it's amazing if it doesn't bring any
dollars or
any like social good or any va like it
doesn't matter
it doesn't matter and so we always need
to be providing
for the business that's the whole reason
why you know these analytics
things exist um but it's actually kind
of interesting
and um you kind of talked about it here
do
let me ask you this does the business
come to the data scientist
and say hey we have this problem
we want this solution can you fix it for
us or
does the data scientist come to the
business and say hey you're doing things
like this right now
if you did this way it would be more
effective which way does it go
i think it will depend on the company
culture
right so um it in the
in the in the case of um
you know a company that is pro uh
having the business uh folks drive
things
they should be responsible if they are
data literate of course
and they should uh they should push that
so
it it all starts with the culture right
ultimately i think
my personal opinion is that you want
your business folks to be data literate
to be very data centered
and understand um the areas that they
know they cannot solve
themselves through intuition they've
built
along the years or through simple rules
uh if then type rules so these hard to
answer questions
they need to be very good at uh
surfacing those um
so for me in my personal opinion i think
the business should be
driving that but it doesn't hurt to have
a wing a data science wing that
proactively
looks for these and and for that it
regardless of that structure
you need that communication between the
two groups
you need to make sure that if that wing
looks for issues proactively that they
continuously consult with the business
side uh when they
find potential issues that uh they would
get
alignment from the business prior to
even start you know
uh performing some hypothesis testings
and things like that
so uh regardless you have to have that
collaboration between the two groups
uh for successful uh to increase the
success rate of these projects
yeah i i totally agree i kind of asked
the question
um yeah not hoping that you wouldn't say
one way or the
or the other it definitely depends and i
think a little bit of both sometimes you
know like
sometimes the business has an idea they
don't know how to do it so they come to
the data science team
or sometimes you know the data
scientists they can just notice
something and they can the business team
and i think there's i think it's kind of
a circle it's like
it's like a chicken or the egg which
came first uh kind of both of them you
know
yeah um you know what companies have to
do
is to kind of agree on what that
flywheel will look like
that flywheel that would you know
perpetrate the
uh finding of issues or finding of
opportunities
that are most likely uh to succeed
uh when these two groups are in a
perpetual
uh communication loop so uh in a sense
ideas can come from the business as well
as ideas can come from
data scientists and keep it like this so
that may work for
a company so i don't think that's a
right or wrong
setting i i agree um and
on on my podcast um
so so my i mean i've worked for two
companies as a data scientist one
very small like 15 people and one very
large
exxon mobil with you know like 70 000
people kind of like
amazon big right um although amazon
exxon very different companies very
different culture very different
products
um however and i've i've to be honest i
have trashed
exxon more than once
on the podcast uh but one thing i'm
going to give them a compliment
one thing that exxon actually did that
was pretty interesting
is we we actually had a data science
team
embedded in our business unit um so i
was part of the data science team
in the research unit but we had like
kind of a sister team
in the business unit and our
relationship i mean
that this was a good good theoretical
thing
the the practitioner or the actual you
know execution wasn't as good
but the idea was that the business team
was like integrated
very tightly with with the actual
products and businesses
you know and they were very data
literate people
and their job and and many of them were
engineers or or even some were data
scientists
um but their job was to be data literate
to know what data can do to know
what you need for data to work and their
job was to look over
the businesses and try to find use cases
and discuss with the business how data
could help them and once they found a
project
they'd actually send it to the research
data team most the time
for us to execute the project so it was
it was almost like we had
you know two different teams and one of
them was you know like more technical
actually doing the work and there was
this other one that was just
you know they were just there to tell
people and explain to people
and find you know opportunities and and
prioritize the opportunities
where data can help and it sounds like
that's what you've done a lot in your
career
is you've basically helped people and
helped teams
be you know data oriented to actually
understand
when and how can data help us is that
true is that that your role
that's correct that's correct okay
that's a fine flywheel you described
there for uh exxon by the way
it was good in theory there was
definitely some some hiccups on on the
execution
um but i i guess like how how does
someone become like greg like how does
someone become like greg
and know where data can help like how do
you see those opportunities
well first of all i think you know i
wouldn't want anybody
nobody needs to be like greg right but
it's kind of like
i can say um in terms of
in terms of data i think the best way to
go
about it is to um start by understanding
its origin where it's coming from what's
what are the events that triggers the
creation of a new data log so
understanding that and then through uh
the end-to-end
um generation of of of new data so if
you're
if you want to uh even as a salesperson
right so you want to understand um
how do you transform a
prospect into a data that is stored in
your
crm tool uh say salesforce for example
what is that process like what triggers
that event you know
is it that first phone call you make
to a customer and uh once that
you know event is logged into salesforce
what happens next uh to to that data
uh you know what what kind of analysis
is being done
and how does that generate uh value
for for the business so understanding uh
a trail
uh you know follow the money follow the
data uh kind of exercise that anybody
needs to needs to do if you want to to
do that now
uh there's also the analytics piece of
it um
you know many resources out there that
can help people understand
um what kind of analysis can be done but
before you go there
uh understand what the business values
in terms of metrics
right you have to find that out first
and how
they came about this conclusion that
these metrics are valuable for them and
why
why are these valuable and then how are
they calculated
and with that uh you can start you know
understanding
where the data lies that helps them
calculate these metrics and then go
further out
and even test uh other hypotheses with
new metrics that may even create more
value to the business because
you're coming in to bring new ideas test
new uh solutions and with that
may come new metrics that you may want
to to test in in
um you know understanding the origin of
data which is a good good place to start
i would say
yeah i i think that's really true um
and those skills um you said earlier you
know these these skills they come with
practice
they come with you know experience um
they're not
really taught much in school at least
they weren't taught to me much in school
which can be hard um because because
it's
it's really and i've said this before
the difference between
a good data scientist and a great data
scientist is often their people skills
you know the ability to talk to other
people to understand business
to you know to actually understand where
data science can be applied and that's
not really that's not a technical skill
and you know boot camps and master's
degrees
and even bachelor's degrees are really
focused on just those technical skills
so
it's it's important to to exercise i
think i think you can learn those
even without without the experience you
know without a job
you just have to practice it one of my
favorite ways is to
figure out how to live a data-driven
life so like
i use i use um my own data all the time
to try to improve my life so for
instance
i have uh you know your phone has screen
time right
like you're always it's keeping track of
how much time you're on your phone do i
use that data to try to improve my life
i always wear an apple watch am i using
that data to try to improve my life so
there's ways that you can like try to
improve you know
the value the business which in this
case is me
um without necessarily having the job um
but you're right it just takes
experience and practice and exercise
uh also leveraging the very simple tools
right don't go too hard on the
fancy uh tools right excel has been here
for so many years it can
deliver on many many uh
questions or many uh projects
so start there manipulate data there and
try to find
extract some insights from from this
data
uh practice it by understanding how
uh your sales monthly
uh fluctuates over over the years
or how the past reviews of sales
fluctuated and what were the drivers
discover the simple things using excel
uh or even the big things excel can
bring much complexity
uh complexity and in in for for a
business it can achieve
a lot of things so um there are some
quite powerful
uh tools that lie inside of excel so
start simple and don't fall don't fall
for
um uh these uh fancy tools out there yet
i i totally agree um i i've been filming
uh modules for my boot camp that's
coming out in a couple weeks
and in one of them i'm talking about
descriptive statistics
and and data visualization and i'm like
honestly
descriptive statistics and data
visualization and a lot of projects give
you 80
of the results with 20 of the effort you
know like you said just make a graph
and look at it there's so much data that
we haven't analyzed and if we just like
made a graph of it we could understand i
mean not everything you know it's not
going to make us a billion dollars
but it can make us you know a couple
thousand like there's like you said
there's untapped
insights hidden in data that we can find
without having to make
uh an a n with million layers you know
you don't have to there's there's easier
ways yeah and the easy the
the hard part for us is that when we
look at um
a significant amount of data as uh
as humans right we we find it hard to
associate
a certain visualizations with specific
events so we rely on the machine to
to do that for us so for example you're
looking at a sales sheet
or sales graph uh over the past year and
you see that
uh one month think and you can't really
understand or remember what event really
triggered that
uh uh you know you know
that affected sales during that month so
uh you rely on a tool to
to to give you those and um i think
but just to your point just visualizing
it
will start uh will help you start asking
questions
yes what happened that month what
happened in may
how can i go deep dive that so so i can
prevent it from happening again
and that's where you know it it matters
to start small
and leverage the uh simple tools that
you have accessible to you now
and then before you go to more complex
landscape
yeah i i love that um a lot of people
ask me
you know oh do i need to know how to
program to have
have a data career what are your
thoughts on that
um so a data career
is a huge uh it
it's a lot there's a big space out there
again you could be an industrial
engineer and you have a data career you
could be an accountant
and have a data career uh accountants
they need help companies
with big accounting teams they need they
need help
uh finance teams uh they leverage
excel for example heavily to uh
reconcile their
their uh you know uh operational plans
or accountings uh to reconcile their
books
etc uh transactions and things so
um you don't need to know uh programming
so there are a lot of
uh local tools that exist again excel
uh uh you know that you can leverage uh
and then added to that um in the recent
years we've seen uh the emergence of
great quality visualization tools
uh tableau power bi uh that are very
flexible into connecting with other data
sources
that you can leverage to uh generate
your
uh video visualizations and even these
tools are
beat up by some key features
like ml where you can leverage a
question
natural language processing to find
key business insights about your data
where you don't have to learn how to
code
to leverage the built-in ml feature of
power bi for example uh just drag and
drop kind of
uh approach so uh who says you have to
know how to program
uh there's a minimum you have to learn
but uh
uh not the hardcore yeah
i totally agree and i think we've been
talking about
a lot of positions right now even you
know like these people that
you know what data can do and you have
the ability to have the eye
to see where it can be applied in
business
you can just tell someone else to do it
you know that that's also
a spot where you don't necessarily need
all you you don't have to know how to do
it you just have to know what the
outcome would be
if you did do it um i did want to go
back to a little bit about
you know business oriented people and
business oriented teams
you mentioned earlier that you really
think they should be data literate
why is that well uh
i think um like any engine
there's a source that fuels it
and pretty much data is what fuels uh
businesses if you consider a business as
an engine and uh that's what gives you a
pulse check
in terms of how far you can go right
your
uh think level will tell you when the
car is going to turn off when it's
running out or
how far you can go in terms of mileage
etc
um and the difference between a fuel
engine and things that is that you can
transform the data to
kind of answer other questions right or
how do i generate new opportunities for
myself
really data is seen as a pulse check
right so um as a business oriented
person
you want to understand whether
the performance of your business is in
part to the business's goal
mission vision um so those things are
very important without knowing for
example
how many customers are unhappy with your
product
uh is uh not knowing how many customers
aren't happy with your products can be
very
uh detrimental to your business if you
don't
uh you know mind that data and
understand what's going on and address
it
in a timely manner so uh in today's
world
uh we can't rely on just siloed teams
to manipulate data and understand uh
what's going on in the grand scheme of
things you need
uh everybody from a cultural perspective
to understand
uh what's going on by leveraging uh data
and manipulating it
at the simplest simplest level uh to
make some uh
quick um i guess discoveries
and take quick actions and businesses
today
have to be very uh flexible
we cannot wait all the time for big data
projects to come to life before we take
make decisions so
you need to be flexible enough to do
some quick analysis
and make quick decisions to stay afloat
i like that i like that you you uh you
don't have to be
pro you know completely proficient but
you have to know enough to
you know data scientists it's hard to
get on the priority list sometimes so
maybe maybe you can do some initial
digging
yourself um and with that
like how can more of these like busy
business-oriented teams ensure that
their data projects don't end up dead
there's like that statistic out there i
don't believe it but i don't know if
you've seen the statistic it's like
that like 80 of data projects
fail like how do we lower that number i
also don't believe that number but
let's pretend like that actually is the
number why why why are
these projects failing yeah um
i guess a lot of the the nature of data
science projects are
kind of like trial and error um yeah by
nature
right so yeah when it comes to trying an
error what are you what do you hear
uh you already hear a lot of failures
will happen right
uh another thing too is a lack of
communication really
um communication between who owns that
final metric
who has the yes no say
for that metric that is struggling or
that needs improvement
uh that misalignment that happens with
that person that point of contact
and the people who can bring the
solution when misalignment happens then
you're doomed to fail uh because you
know expectations
uh change um and and the things that we
can talk about to
to minimize these failures is to start
communications early
right gain alignment early if you look
into
uh the data science life cycle
uh you consider the very first uh task
which is business problem understanding
um
in that sense this is where uh for me
it has lasted months just that cycle
right
just that task right there yeah where uh
people
get together to uh understand
or agree that this is a valid problem
that
a simple uh that cannot simply be
answered
uh any where any other way
but through a data science uh solution
and um you know then once you
agree that there's a pain point there
you have to
start um thinking about what that
solution looks like
um and you know setting expectations
uh with the business so this
conversation has to happen
as soon as possible and even
understanding what are the risk of
delivering uh
to that solution and make sure that
business folks
agree to this risk it's all about making
sure and throughout the
project itself you want to maintain this
communication
so uh there's no drift right there could
be some drift
where uh business folks say well that's
not what i was expecting here
why did we change this when did that
change kind of conversation
and then you have you know inside of
that transformation too you have you
know something like
feature engineering uh uh process
you know figuring out what are the
things that as a data scientist i can
start
you know i can maintain communication
with the business to understand
that uh to make sure that they
understand why
we arrived at certain conclusions so in
other words long story short
um continuous communication i think
that's the biggest
um uh fall and typically when projects
deviate from uh business goals or
business missions
uh they tend to fail
you you mute
sorry about that i uh i raised my desk i
didn't want to hear the noise um
there's that theme again of you know
what makes a good data scientist what
makes a good
data project people skills being able to
communicate um
so i don't think we can emphasize that
enough that people think oh
they hear my job i kind of explain what
i do oh you're a programmer
well i mean sometimes but a lot of the
times i'm a you know i'm a business
person i'm a marketer
i'm a you know operations person you
know
trying to to actually talk to the the
units
and understand their problems and make
sure we our solutions actually solving
their problem
uh so i think i think that's great
advice um
another thing i was thinking about while
you were kind of answering is
people sometimes forget that data
science is
has that word in it science you know
um i come from a background of chemical
engineering and i worked inside of a
of a chemistry lab as an undergrad um
and i was a a technician and i would run
experiments
and these experiments would take like
four hours long long
you know and sometimes it wouldn't go
well like sometimes we forgot to plug in
a tube or we figure out to press
start or like we forgot to unplug
something
and the experiment would fail and you'd
have to restart the whole thing
and it would take another four hours um
you know and that happens in data
science too we're just lucky that a lot
rebuilding in data science often doesn't
take four hours right
you can press rerun on that code really
quickly
but it doesn't doesn't mean just because
it's fast sometimes doesn't mean that
it's not still science we're still
trying to figure out all this stuff
um so i think that was a great point
um the last thing i want to ask you is
well i guess yeah the last thing i want
to ask you is
why do you post on linkedin you know
because
because you're you're posting every day
and you have like this full-time job
at amazon you're providing awesome
content
and interesting information for the
community
what what drives you man why why are you
doing that
um yeah i mean there's no like um
straight reason i think there are some
you know
personal reasons in terms of testing my
knowledge
and uh making sure that um
you know gained some a little bit of
confidence in terms of uh
uh an area that wasn't part of my uh
portfolio before
uh again you know to me and i have some
people who would
disagree with that i don't call myself a
data scientist
um i have uh people in my
uh integrated machine learning family
uh uh led by many uh in the community
here i see one here manpreet
thank you for showing up i see you on
the on the list here
uh who would disagree and would consider
me as a data science
um uh student so
uh when i come across the different
subjects that i find interesting that
i'm able to understand
i i find it uh as a duty to
share it with the community so they can
grow as well i do uh
like to promote that um things that i
feel like are
uh useful i try to put my own spin
into it um and with that i open myself
up to
uh feedback right good or bad and uh
regardless it reinforces
my knowledge of said subject so with
that over time
um i feel like it makes me better uh
posting on linkedin also helps me
uh practice my content generation skills
right so
i write a lot of documents at work
currently
uh and it helps me curate a lot of paper
it helps me read faster too
because posting content also requires me
to
also consume a lot of content so i have
to tap into many articles so i have to
get faster at that
um it there are so many um
benefits for myself uh and i'm
i'm hoping and thank you for that that
you know the audience also see
value into this um and at the end of the
day it's all about helping each other
and uh and the last leg too is um i
i see myself uh over the next uh years
to uh helping more startups uh grow
in that space too so building an
audience i
attract a lot of uh uh startup
you know founders co-founders that uh
end up reaching out to me so we can
discuss
uh look for opportunities or uh how i
can help them on the business on their
business model
um how to lay out the strategy for their
business and things like that so
with that um i need more practice to
better help them uh reach their goals so
uh it's been a mutually beneficial uh
journey that i'm uh not seeing any
i'm not planning on stopping anytime
soon so i really enjoy that that's
awesome there was uh
i loved how there was multiple reasons
you know and some of that is to
like you said it's it's a symbiotic
relationship
something that is to give and some of
that you know you're not i don't like
the word take but you're also
being given to um from the community um
i love what you said about i have to
learn how to you know
how to write better you know how do i
write something that's interesting to
someone how do i summarize
because you post a lot of articles how
do i summarize the gist of an article
in a way that helps someone understand
it how do i
learn to read faster and consume faster
and you know pick out the important
parts um and then on top of that
helping the community attracting anyways
it's very cool what you're doing
um i love it i think you're on the right
path i i definitely love
the article so i'm sure uh everyone else
does
as well so thank you for your
contributions to the community we really
appreciate it
yes i do appreciate it too it's a
humbling uh
exercise and a humbling journey and um
i'm uh
you know i continuously learn from good
content creators too
uh out there um i continuously learn
from
people who have platforms right so if
you think about how you and i got in
touch
uh with each other and things like that
so i love being in
uh different sessions as much as i can
to to learn from other people
and hoping that other people learn from
me as well so
uh i appreciate you inviting me again to
this platform to
be able to share my story and share my
point of view and
i invite anyone else to to uh give me
feedback and
um you know uh uh point me in the right
direction
on uh anything that i've uh may have
addressed
um always looking for different
perspectives and
i think as the community
is set up like this being open to uh
listening
to uh people's different perspectives
and that's what makes the community so
strong
and i'm grateful for that that's awesome
craig you're
you're a good man you're a humble guy i
love that you're uh
they're in sales there's this thing
called abc always be closing
i've i've changed it to abl always be
learning and i can tell
you're definitely someone who who you
know is always learning
in their life and super cool i mean just
from like a perspective of
you're a supervisor at amazon like
that's obviously a prestigious company
a prestigious role um like
yeah and yet here you are you're like i
want to learn from other people so i
i appreciate you man i i think that's
awesome
we'll we'll end it on this note i just
uh saw a comment here
uh from marcel uh
rogue who's who's actually marcel we
worked at exxon together right i can't i
can't tell but he says go gators
this is my sign thank you marcel go
gators indeed
i love that that's awesome thank you so
much greg for joining the podcast
i really appreciate it everyone who's
listening definitely follow greg
on linkedin to get those valuable
curated articles and insight
in all things tech and data so give them
a follow i'll have
his uh linked in connection
uh in the show notes as well so thank
you again for having me
appreciate it yes of course thanks
everyone for listening um
marcel's here ao's here sneha's here
myra
thank you ron thank you james thank you
appreciate your guys's support
and uh i think we'll be on next week
with another pod
so uh we'll see you guys then all right
bye everyone
bye

Title: Leadership in Analytics with Dustin Schimek

Description: Join me as I chat with Dustin Schimek to learn about his path to leadership in analytics! We'll talk about his journey and what he's enjoyed about it.

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hey everyone it's tuesday and i got a
great
guest with me today we got dustin chymic
dustin how you doing
hey doing well avery how are you good
good
so i'm really excited to have dustin
he's a great contributor
to the data community on linkedin
um and he i'll go ahead and introduce
him he's
an analytics professional who loves to
identify how data can be used in
business
right because data alone for data's sake
is stupid
you got to solve business problems he's
the director of strategy and analytics
at the master law company
and was a data analyst at the the most
famous motorcycle company in the world
harley-davidson right here in milwaukee
yeah yeah there you go
uh he has an undergrad in both economics
and political science and an mba from
university of wisconsin-milwaukee
and and one last thing dustin he is an
avid milwaukee bucks fans who are
playing tonight
yeah fear the deer playing today you can
see the fear of the deer towel that was
from game four of the finals right
behind me here so
there you go man they're playing tonight
for game seven
i got my uh i got my uh my game seven
towel from the astros world series oh
that's right
yeah in 2019. uh but i hope the outcome
is better for you than it is for me man
but you said people had a great
experience right oh yeah it was an
awesome experience but the astr's lost
uh i'll cheer for the bucks tonight and
and dustin's going to game set or game
six so hopefully he gets to see
an nba championship six that's what
we're hoping for
that's awesome well thank you so much
for joining dustin
um anyone else who is watching live
on linkedin or youtube go ahead and say
hello in the comments we'll we'll try to
say hello back
but those who are listening on the pod
we'll go ahead and
get straight into it so dustin first
let's talk about
where you're currently at um which is
the master law company i don't know
what they do exactly what do they do
yeah absolutely no i appreciate you
asking that and yes i'm currently i'm
director of strategy and analytics
at the master lock company here of
course today representing kind of my own
perspective
um not my company's perspective just on
you know kind of my path
sharing my path up to a leadership role
in analytics so super excited to be
doing that and actually by the way i
have to show this this is kind of dorky
but
i do have my oh get on camera party with
my data
party mug i always try to pull this out
when we have linkedin live events
um but uh yeah for sure so um
currently um leading kind of
um any of the growth orientated
analytics projects that we have going
um at master lock so really i'm
responsible for
ideating and maintaining a active
list of road map items that kind of
leverage data to grow our business
so it's really a growth orientated rule
role
very entrepreneurial type role and
that's mixing my two favorite things i
i love being an entrepreneur and using
data
i like sports too but those two things
professionally those are really good for
me
so i'm super super fortunate to have the
position
that i do and in such an exciting time
for the data world and analytics world
um as far as you asked first what does
master lock do so
um we're headquartered here in milwaukee
wisconsin in the usa
um 100 year old company we're actually
celebrating our 100th year
anniversary this year yeah really
exciting a lot of cool stuff that we've
got going
on social media um you can give master
like follow on social media
in the community here as well but super
proud of that
we are a manufacturer of security
padlocks
um safety padlocks safety devices
we own sentry safe as well so if you
have a safe in your home
may well be uh century um so we did
acquire sentry um a few years back
but a big player in the security
mechanical security business as well as
now more recently to
the electronic security business so we
also have a portfolio of
electronic products connected products
bluetooth et cetera so
um pretty fun time um to be at the the
company and fortunate to be at a company
um especially a you know manufacturer
that's really leveraging data for growth
super exciting and definitely proud to
be a part of it yeah that's that's super
cool
and obviously you know very important
because
everyone needs locks right there on
everyone's front doors you need to lock
you know vans and all sorts of things so
definitely doing big important things in
the world keeping people safe and
keeping things
safe right exactly hashtag for
everything worth protecting
and follow that on social media yeah
there there you go that that makes sense
um and sweet i want to get into a little
bit what you talked about there
of kind of your path to a you know
this intersection between data and
business leadership
um i did want to say hello we got sana
watching how you doing sana
i hope you're well and
natish what's good natish
hope you guys are doing well and hello
to everyone else watching
but let's get into that there um
how does that happen because a lot of
times where we think where business
intersects analytics you get business
analyst
right but but you're you're kind of you
know one step
above that maybe doing a little bit less
of the technical work and doing more
of like the big picture you know the
strategy because that i mean that's your
title right it's director of strategy
and
analytics strategy is in there too yeah
yeah
that we have strategy and analytics
finding you know
their ways into titles right now it's
pretty cool yeah it's that's very
interesting
um i guess just broadly speaking you
know not necessarily
where you are but but i guess how did
you
how did you get to where you are and i
guess what what does someone at your
level kind of think about big picture
wise versus
that might be different from uh business
analysts yeah i know those are great
questions and so to tackle the first one
first in terms of kind of the path here
um it's been about a ten-year path um
in the analytics field and started after
i finished my mba over here at the
university of wisconsin-milwaukee
um i was fortunate enough to get kind of
an entry level sales analyst position
at a company in the area and it was in a
role where we're using a lot of excel
um you know some other tools that are um
maybe going away a little bit
currently but um i was really involved
with um
so many different just a broad spectrum
of challenges working for a variety of
different channels in that business and
was just kind of thrown into the fire
and um through doing so was able to
quickly learn that
um you know hey i was kind of good at
some of the stuff that i was doing
um and i was just you know it's a
combination of being a little bit good
at it and also lucky to
to find something that i was good at and
um
you know the the number one thing that i
would say that i did in that first roll
that i had was um as i learned new
skills and tools and things like that i
would think about
um how could i over deliver what i was
creating so
if i was tasked with something i was you
know given a project
i would want to if i knew i could do it
and do it well
i would over deliver on it you know so
if you know we talk about going 110
or whatever but you know if you're in an
entry-level role i would say go
and you know you can do something really
well go to 150
or 200 and make it something that people
will remember because
you're going to add a ton of value in
doing that and you're also people are
going to remember that it's going to put
some eyes on on what you did and
that can be kind of the starting point
that over delivery to start to work your
way up
so that was one thing that i did early
on but um eventually i took
i did a lot of projects on the side um
you know you and i both are kindred
spirits and loving projects and being
big believers in the value of projects
um and so i did i took on projects on
the side
you know kind of through my own little
business and my free time
i also um uh moved on to
a data analyst role in the product
development area at harley-davidson for
a while which was interesting
to me because i had never been part of a
product development group and
you know worked from the perspective of
an analyst within that group
learned a lot of things there that i was
able to carry with me and wouldn't have
otherwise had but um um i loved working
for harley is very cool very cool brand
um iconic company but um you know i was
fortunate enough to
to get a manager position um at the end
of my time there
and um from that point forward you know
i really i just continued to do
things the same way i always did i took
an entrepreneurial mindset i was always
scanning for where there was
opportunities and there's always a lot
of opportunity with data
it's such it's still i think the field
is in its infant stages and most
companies are
i'd say 95 percent of companies haven't
fully tapped into the value of their
data and so i was
i went into that new role constantly now
with a little bit more leadership
um responsibility you know scanning for
opportunities and when i would find
um opportunities i would just use the
heck out of them and again use that same
model of over delivering
you know get some attention on that and
use it as a building block and um
you know fortunately i think it worked
very well for me and it's worked
very well for some of the organizations
i've been a part of
yeah wow okay there's a there's a lot of
um
interesting things there i i want to
unpack
um let's start let's start uh with
the you know your mba so did you did you
know you wanted to always be
you know high level business you know
leader type of thing or or is that
something
that you discovered later or what what
makes what drives you towards this you
know this
leadership or or you know uh yeah
leadership role
that's a great question and so the
answer is no i i didn't have
um that specific aspiration at all you
know i would say that today i don't even
have that same
aspiration i would say that um i was
always focused on
in the moment in the role that i was in
you know adding the most value i
possibly could
and um you know um that was really me to
a t was i would
always be scanning for opportunities
and meeting them with either the skills
that i had or skills that i knew i could
go out and get
and so i would focus more on over
delivering one
you know and given the opportunity but
two when i saw an opportunity
not worrying about so much about the
technical side of it but doing whatever
i could to meet that need
um you know using some of the tool
technical tools and skills that are out
there and so almost working backwards to
meet the needs of the business using
data
um and yeah i love that i love that
aspect of things i love
problem solving i love finding um new
opportunities and seizing them using
data it's just so ripe for it
right now at so many places and um
that's that's
really what it's all about about for me
is i love to win
using data i like to find new
opportunities um
you know to seize using data and um
you know i kind of unfortunate that i do
what i like to do and i'm just kind of
i've i've risen up along with doing it
you know it's just it's a combination of
being
a little bit lucky and good at something
that i do
yeah that's that's very interesting that
was kind of my next question is is what
do you
you know a lot of um a lot of even you
know technical professionals careers
you know they kind of maybe look like
this yeah you know
but but you've kind of had you know a
little bit of a a you know more steep
uh approach in uh in your jobs and your
roles
what do what do you attribute that to
you you said luck
and uh being at least a little good as
soon as always helps it always helps
yeah i know i've been fortunate to kind
of be in the right place in the right
time
at times in my career um you know just
getting into analytics not being set out
you know
um to go into it or even have any idea
where it was going i mean 10 years ago i
had no idea
that it would look anything like what it
does today and so there's absolutely
some luck
involved with that you know um but um
it's also
you know along the way the more projects
i delivered the more confidence i had
um that i could do this over and over
again and so i got a little more bold in
terms of
the opportunities i would identify and
go after
but i kept you know just kind of being
right there in the moment with each of
them
and trying to over deliver on each of
them
and really meet whatever the needs as
cliche as that may be of the business at
the time you know that was my total
focus was just to
totally over deliver and um
you know meet a need solve a problem
move the business or organization
forward in some way using data
yeah i don't know i just i love that i
love the intersection of those things
yeah i i love that anyone who's who's
watching right now
i think you know learned from dustin
here he was he was focused at the job at
hand and giving you know 110
and providing value to the business in
the moment and that helped him
you know climb climb the ladder of you
know inside of a company or allowed him
to switch to a different company
but being able to focus and like really
provide value
on the one project you have in your lap
right there and then
is is important um what about your jump
from
harley davidson uh to the master lock
company was
was that like was that like a jump that
was like horizontal
or is that like did you jump up like
when you switched companies
uh yeah no so it was a vertical movement
you know role wise between
um harley to master lock and um
you know it is very much um still five
years ago if you think about it you know
and i mean analytics is still
on this growth trajectory upwards you
know but we were a little lower on it
you know the whole world was five years
ago and so yeah
um things looked different at the time
um you know but i would say
the same was true then as it is now is
that you know the technical skills
you know oftentimes i found that um
you know either i can learn them if i
need to to deliver a project
or you know we can find some talent that
does but um the biggest thing is is
really
um keeping your eyes open and listening
for opportunities for projects that are
going to move the business forward
and value and i've got some tips on that
i can share later on how to
how to find those things and how to keep
your ears open where to keep your ears
open for those things but um
you know that and um and then just um
using soft skills you know to kind of um
really care about
um the folks that you're delivering this
work for that is so important you know
these things are
are just as important if not more than
the technical stuff
scanning for projects scanning for stuff
that's adding value and then really
really being intentional
and care about the folks that you're
delivering it to make sure that it
really meets the need and
um you know over deliver in doing that
yeah for sure whenever whenever i do
these interviews
for the data career podcast i'm always
you know struck by
it's not necessarily the technical
skills that separate
these awesome data professionals from
good data professionals
yeah it's it's very interesting because
you'd think
oh yeah data professionals technical
skills but
the the thing that makes them very you
know noticeable and
separable is is these people skills
right
yeah definitely i think people skills
and just just taking the perspective of
at least for me personally
you know viewing your role as your own
business
you know and um if you if your role was
your own business what decisions would
you make what things would you go after
you know when you think that way and
i recognize you're not going to be able
to think that way in all of the things
that you're doing there's always going
to be responsibilities that you have at
the company that you
just have to do but when you start
thinking that way
um you know and then you work backwards
you use technical skills to meet
the needs that you see or seize the
opportunities that you find through
thinking that way that's when you're
really going to create
enormous value and even if it's just 20
percent of your time
that you're doing um to do those things
that's going to probably add 80
of the value that you create as an
individual contributor in the
organization that you're in and so
um you know i love the 80 20 rule um
avery but
um that's i think that's so true it's
it's if you block time
and even if you're not asked to do it
you know but you
add some value through an opportunity
that you identify you know no one's
gonna very rarely is anyone gonna fault
you for that and usually it's probably
in most cases gonna open up the door for
you to do more of those kinds of things
because people are gonna see that you're
capable of doing it and oh yeah
you know wow this person could do that
that gives me these other ideas that i
think they could do and then they're
going to have a little bit more creative
latitude and then that builds over time
you know
yeah for sure um let's talk more about
that i just want to i did want to say
hello to
harpreet who was watching yes hey thank
you hey good to see you
yeah good to see you harpreet um that is
a very excellent point that you brought
up
and um one thing that's interesting i
was reading your your linkedin
about section right um and one thing it
says
is you know it says something like
dustin is has like an entrepreneurial
mindset and data professional i don't
know i'm butchering it i'm sorry
two things you need to know that data
professional that is pretty much me yeah
but but that's such a good point i mean
obviously you're high up you know you're
a director so you do have
a little bit more say than maybe someone
who's just like an individual
contributor
or like a you know an entry-level
programmer or data analyst or something
like that
but i think having an in an
entrepreneurial mindset like you said
if my role was my own business how would
i be
how would i think about it how would i
go about acting i think that's a good
exercise to do
um and i think in today's society we
hype up
entrepreneurs more than we should and
or or maybe we celebrate them you know
what adequately
but we don't celebrate what i what i've
come to you know
learn is is i call them intrapreneurs
as in they are inside of a company
making a difference at the company
acting as if an entrepreneur
would and and we don't hype those up
enough there's people
you know and in you know big companies
and small companies
they're not the ceo they're not on the
board they're just
individual people that are
giving 110 percent like you said
scanning for opportunities where they
can provide value
and then providing that value and
they're they're shaping the course of
the company but
i don't think they get as much
recognition as they should yeah
no i totally i totally agree with you
and um just to
piggyback off of the last thing you said
not getting the recognition that they
should i think that you know
there are um there are cases where maybe
folks that
deliver a massive amount of value kind
of fly under the radar
um and that always hurts me to see that
because
um you know i try uh to help as i can to
promote those
individuals but um you know i think that
um that's something i would offer some
encouragement on to folks listening you
know
you know that you're you're creating a
ton of value for
your business your organization for
whatever it is you're working on you
know
um it's definitely it's not a bad thing
to share that you know of course we want
to be respectful and polite in how we do
that but um
you don't have to hide that you know
people i would
say in my career 99 of the time are very
receptive
um when i've just taken a few minutes to
highlight something that
you know i've done or a team has done or
whatever um
because you know the thing is is we're
hired to
find these opportunities as analysts
we're we're hired to use our skills in a
way that
um you know in many cases our our peers
and other functions or senior leaders
aren't aren't able
um so it's just not that's not what they
do you know and so um
you know it's i always say you know
oftentimes hey i'd be remiss if i didn't
bring this
up you know um and i think um i think
more folks should feel empowered to do
that quite frankly
yeah that's that's a great point um to
be honest
and to get a little personal that's
actually one of the reasons why i left
exxonmobil is just because
i didn't feel like they were valuing
valuing my contributions as much as they
should
to be honest they were valuing my contra
the things i made but not attributing it
back to me
and i was very frustrated with it um and
i'm a very
uh i don't know if you know like the the
four color code human thing of like red
yellow blue
white i don't know it very well but
whatever one is the peacemaker that's me
like
i i avoid confrontation
i just don't i just rather like harm
myself than have confrontation
but you bring up a good point it's like
if you are providing value and you feel
like you're making a difference like
you should be able you should be able to
feel like you can at least approach you
know your manager and be like hey
like i feel like i'm contributing and
i'm not getting recognized like
at least bring it up right yeah and i
think too even i think it's okay to
even ask you know as appropriate of
course you know depending on what
meetings you're in if there's something
that you've done that's relevant
to the context of that meeting or forum
or whatever you know
i would say just have the courage to ask
for a few minutes on the agenda to share
something that you've done that you
think is of value you know and
um i don't think there's anything wrong
with that and um and the cool thing is
is when you bring it up in front of a
group of people
you know no longer can one person say
you know oh that doesn't have merit so
i'm not gonna
you know promote that within the
organization now that it's once it's out
to a group of people it's out you know
and so um
you know i think i think oftentimes it's
hard for folks to promote themselves or
their work a little bit
um especially as it's more than one or
two people gather together but um
you know i would say as much as you can
you know even if you're not a great
speaker it doesn't matter
if you're doing something that's adding
value you know
ask for time on an agenda just even if
it's five minutes you know or
if you can't if if you actually can't do
that then i would say write it you know
respond
um to a group of people on an email
chain just to offer some tidbits on
something you did hey
i think that this would um add some
value or be of interest to this group
you know for this reason or whatever and
um just call it right out and um i think
99 of the time people be very receptive
to that
yeah that's that's awesome advice i
appreciate that um
let's let's go back to uh you know i'm
i'm uh let's say i'm a data analyst
um let's say i'm working for uh
i don't know some company all right
let's let's just make it like a
mid-sized company
i'm a data analyst um and uh
i just like i'm i'm just doing my job
you know
i'm i'm i'm doing what i'm told but i
don't feel like i'm making a difference
um i don't feel like i'm you know
getting promoted as much as i would like
or maybe i'm not getting the pay bumps
that i would like
um what would you suggest to that data
analyst
well i mean i think one thing that you
can do is uh actually a couple
i mean i think um first of all
regardless of whether
you're in that situation or not um i
think
that being actively part of
the analytics community in your area
or if there isn't one in your area
there's a lot online
you know being part of that is always a
great thing for your own development as
well as for your own
networking you know and so if you are
um by chance at an organization that
doesn't value what you're doing
um i think fortunately there's fewer and
fewer organizations that are not valuing
folks with the skill sets in this field
um but um you know then hey then you
know you're immersed in a community of
other professionals that do value it
and there's probably a spectrum of folks
there from you know analyst roles up to
leadership roles and
i know in some cases even in our
milwaukee community at some of the
groups that i go to you know there's
executives that attend just
to learn more about things so i think
you know just being immersed in a
community
um is uh very empowering because um
you know that um you are valued and that
you know if for some reason
um an organization isn't valuing you you
know that there's other places that
would and i think that that's
um i think that that can actually can
only help your quality of work that
you're doing because you're going to
approach it with a greater level of
confidence
yeah that that that makes sense i i like
the community aspect definitely
underplayed and there are some really
awesome communities
um that that's one of the reasons why i
hated chemical engineering is there was
just
zero community um and i just online in
person it was just bad
it's just always better to to do stuff
together and network in that way so i
like that
um okay and uh going back to
what you said about like hannah having
the wondering eye
how like scanning the situation and
seeing how you could
how could you evaluate you said you had
some tips for that what what tips do you
have for
you know identifying potential
opportunities that could bring
value and then acting on those
opportunities
yeah absolutely um no thanks for
bringing that up again um
so number one thing um that i would say
and i especially do this
if i'm new to an organization is i will
constantly
be listening for common themes to emerge
in um you know conversations that i'm
either directly in when i'm on
with folks um or that i overhear
or that i hear in meetings you know i
think over time after a few months
sometimes even within a few weeks
um you're going to start to hear some of
the same questions asked
or some of the things same you know
things talked about with maybe some
ambiguity around it
um you know or maybe some things will
just jump out at you that wow you know
this is here this is not here and it
should be
you know and then once you identify what
those things are oh by the way always
write them down
so as soon as you start to hear a
you know theme of a certain question
popping up all the time
or you know you see an opportunity for
something even if it's even if it's in
your sleep you see an opportunity
for something you know um pick up a
piece of paper or
hopefully you have a journal um of ideas
and and write it down
you know and then um over time what
you're going to find is you're going to
have a lot of ideas
and that's when i think you use that
time that you've blocked you know that i
called it 20
times whatever it is use time that
you've blocked to work just on those
things that add value you know
and um do this you know same thing i was
talking about work backwards use your
technical skills to meet those needs
you know um and and uh just have the
courage to try to implement a solution
around it and then share what you're
doing
um that's um i recognize maybe it won't
work in every situation but um those are
the kinds that i
things that i did especially earlier on
as an analyst
yeah that yeah that that makes sense and
i like what you say you know set out
20 of your time to to work on these
types of problems
i mean that might be hard for some
people because their company doesn't
encourage it necessarily
but but maybe it's 10 you know right
exactly
yeah one thing that exxon
did well in theory was you had four
hours a week for
quote unquote innovation time oh that's
awesome
well it is in theory
to be honest if you took the four hours
you were kind of like
like not smiled upon oh really okay i
mean
that's how i felt like it was like it
wasn't really
it was it was there to say it was there
but it wasn't actually really in
practice and most people
didn't take it i took it and i anyways
um but i think i think that is a good
practice for a company to have
especially a company that wants to grow
and wants to improve
right because um i love this quote from
steve jobs and i'm going to butcher it
but the the gist of it
is we hire like the world's best and
smartest people
right not to tell them what to do we
hire them so they tell us what to do
right exactly yeah that takes a lot of
humility for
like someone like yourself like a
director you know i'm in charge
to like listen to people though right
yeah i know i mean i think i think it's
it's totally true that quote i mean i
think that um
you know too there's i like the the
henry ford quote of you know folks were
to ask me
or if i were to ask folks what they
wanted you know they would tell me a
faster horse
you know and so i think that that's
where that plays into what we're talking
about here in that
you know maybe you're you're working on
that faster horse delivering that faster
horse because that's what people are
asking for ninety percent of the time
but then
what if you spend five or ten percent of
your time delivering the the model t
you know um and um i like the analogy
because
you don't have to have a perfect
solution you know right now we've got a
heck of a lot more
um you know than a model t driving
around out on our streets right but
um we didn't start that way nor did we
have to and so um i think when you
dedicate some time to to just get
started with something that's going to
add value whether other people see it or
understand it or not
and you have the courage to to do some
work around that invest a little bit of
time in there and then share with folks
what you're doing that's when things are
gonna
um that's when stuff's gonna happen you
know that's when incremental
growth is gonna happen both for you as
well as your organization
yeah i 100 agree i think
every every like meaningful
part of my career that has occurred was
probably because of something
that i did that i wasn't necessarily
asked to do
that's where like the true growth and
expansion comes
80 20 rule there yeah 80 20 year old
yeah you're definitely right you're
getting
a lot of the career benefit by you know
10 of your
side hustle at work right right
yeah absolutely and and some folks may
be in a position where
you know they're being asked to be
creative and to create new stuff and and
then
wow that's an awesome opportunity and um
you know never leave that
no right it's it's in my opinion the
best thing you know
someone could possibly be doing but i
know not everyone shares that
um perspective but um but no i think um
you know going to going to meetings to
conversations to
and when i say meetings it could be
one-on-one it could be one with a large
group of people but
being very intentional about listening
you know and um
listening to what the themes are that
are emerging you know and then thinking
about what ideas you could implement
using your technical skills um to help
solve for some of the
issues you're hearing about the
questions that can't be answered stuff
like that
um you know write that stuff down and
then use that time if it's 10
or 100 of your time you know create some
solutions around that stuff and don't
worry so much about the tech first you
know worry about the
the uh what the challenge is and and at
least conceptually coming up with a
solution to it that um you suspect you
know tech could be used to meet it
yeah that that's a great point um guys
one thing i really like
about dustin and he said it a couple
times he says you need to listen
right and that's um that's a hard skill
for people like me
because i like to blab i like to talk um
but
but no i think you're a great listener
too um i've interacted with dustin a
couple times and he's always
he's always a great listener and and you
know he said this earlier
he writes down what he hears right he he
not only listens but he takes the time
to write down and ponder it and think
about it and actually like okay how does
how does what this person said apply to
my life i think it's just such a
valuable skill
to have in any profession but especially
in data just because
you know people a lot of times you don't
even have to come up with ideas
you just have to like figure out how to
have the ideas
that you hear from other people come to
fruition right or how how do you put
like a little spin on their idea and
actually
and actually make it work so model
dustin's example he's a good listener
all right that's that's my advice for
everyone listening
well you're certainly very kind i
appreciate that but i
i agree that listening is something we
should all work on you know
it actually is something that i've had
to be pretty intentional about working
on myself
i'm fortunate to work for a company that
is you know very supportive of um
developing yourself around the seven
habits of highly effective people if
you've heard that it's kind of part of
our methodology and
um you know habit five if you're
familiar with it you know or not
check it out um that seek first to um
understand that to be understood you
know and that that habit has really
resonated
with me it's an area that i could
improve personally in and have tried to
be intentional about improving in and i
think
um you know when you're intentional
about um seeking first to understand and
to listen
you know good things are gonna happen
for you um if you if you never think
about that
yeah that's that's a that's a great
point and i i am familiar
i mean i i don't have a memorized but i
uh yeah stephen covey really really
interesting uh author for sure to yeah
for sure
to learn more about um
all of that stuff all of his stuff a lot
of these you know these
leadership um you know philosophies and
that a lot of it
applies very well to analytics and
leadership and analytics you know
it's not that management theory you know
and methodologies and that is a totally
different world there's a major
intersection
um with analytics yeah
what what else does it take to be a
leader
of an analytics team what other skills
do you think are useful
oh i mean i think it's um you know i
think just uh
remembering that people are people you
know and um
you know you have to um i actually i was
it was funny i was just um telling
someone that with the nba finals going
on i was going back and reading
um a book by phil jackson 11 rings you
know the guy that was the coach of the
bulls and
lakers and that and um one thing that i
loved about
phil's approach was that he talks about
this in the book
is um you know he he was so focused on
each individual player
on his team um and you know would pour
himself into each person
and would share books with them that he
thought would be relevant just to them
individually not it's not like he was
giving the same book
out to the entire team he was picking
books specific to
individual players and stuff and i think
interesting yeah when you have that
level of care you know i was talking
earlier about having to care about the
individuals that you're delivering
projects to but when you have that level
of care about your peers
or your um team you know if you're if
you're managing folks you know
um um i've been a manager of people for
a relatively short period of time you
know so i'm not
claiming to have all the answers here
but um but to answer your question
directly i mean i think the most
important person
the most important thing is to care
about um the individuals
you know and to really be intentional
about um developing them based upon who
they you know uniquely
are um and that's when you know i think
you can bring the best work out of them
i guess for phil
it brought you know 11 rings out of the
people that he managed you know so i
don't know that's good enough for me i
guess
it worked out for him i i lost one way
or another um
okay and i guess what what should
leaders
you know maybe not even in analytics
let's just let's take you know
the a manager at staples or or maybe
just like
some sort of manager at a mid-sized
company what should they know
about analytics because you know
obviously
it's a big thing going on in the world
right now but like
what what should they you know be
telling their employees what should
they be on the lookout for like if i'm
just a general leader
of a team or of a group in the world
what should i know about analytics
according to dustin yeah i mean that's a
big question um and i think it does
you know change depending on the
situation or industry that you're in but
i think in general
yeah i think in general you know it's
having an open-mindedness
about it you know know that um there's a
lot of momentum behind us and it's for
good reason
um it's for good reason there's a lot of
you know you and i know it a lot of the
folks listening are going to know this
but not everybody knows this and that's
something as leaders that we have to to
work to change but
um you know there's a lot of potential
with it for good there's a lot of
potential
with it for good and so um you know i
would say
just incrementally get a little bit more
exposure to it
um actually i i promise you i did not
plan on this but
um there is a gentleman chris um talber
out there that puts out a magazine
data for exact uh oh yeah and uh for a
while he was offering free subscriptions
i don't know if he is anymore or not but
um he'd be a good guy to follow but
you know whether it's that whether it's
following a hashtag related to analytics
on social media
whether it's you know reading a couple
articles every day setting your google
alerts to read something about if you're
you know if you run a car dealership
you know um car dealership dashboards or
car dealership analytics you know and
set an alert on that and reading what
people are writing about it you know or
um google searching for um dashboards
for car dealerships or something like
that you know just
incrementally expose yourself to it um
you know during whatever time it is that
you have that you can actually focus
on that kind of stuff you know that
might be a little bit different than
what you've looked at before just um
expose yourself to it and
i think you'd be surprised you know i
find that folks um
you know once they just start to get a
little bit of a taste of what the
capabilities are
um with analytics and things start to
click like oh wow this
really worked well for someone that does
something similar to me
um or that gosh that was a great idea
geez i didn't know you could even do
that or wow now i get what that tool
does
it only takes a little spark you know
and then and then folks can
be off to the races with it as long as
they're intentional about
dedicating time to it but i i mean i
think you know there's use cases
in just about every you know function or
industry but i think it starts with a
little bit of exposure just an
open-mindedness you know don't go in
um ever with the attitude of um and i
think the same is true for anything but
of you know hey i got this
covered and i don't need to know this
you know i think that's that's the only
probably one thing that's going to hold
you back from not
ever benefiting from it or seizing any
of the opportunities from it
i like that so if you're if you're a
manager and you're
watching or you're listening and you
know you're not so sure about data
have an open mind to start and maybe get
some exposure you know whether that's
just google or whether that's you know
reading on medium
right or whether that's listening to the
data career podcast
any of those words how could i possibly
forget avery yes
i'm just joking um okay sweet i liked
that
um i definitely think that's those are
valid valid points just
open minds a little bit of exposure
that's all you can ask for
yeah um we did have a question here you
can do too right i mean
even a you know manager that has no
experience in analytics i mean
heck you could you know find a concept a
dashboard concept you like and
i mean it could be anything it doesn't
mean dashboard concept but you know
um and watch a few youtube videos you
know on um
you know how it was made and you know be
surprised maybe you might be able to
learn the skills yourself to do
something quickly at least put in a
you know going back to the henry ford
example to put a model t solution
in place you know it doesn't have to be
a ferrari out of the gate you can add
value to the model t
you know yeah that gets you excited
absolutely love it
um we did have a question here from more
resources around it too
it might get you some more yeah that's a
good point
yeah did have a question here from jason
yeah
what are y'all's thoughts on people
saying data science careers are being
saturated in
entry-level roles
yeah so if i understand the question
correctly you know um
i think you're kind of asking that all
data science positions are entry level
um you know i i think
here's the thing the field is evolving
very rapidly
and so i think maybe by default you know
there's a lot of entry level roles
created but i do
think that in the last few months um
especially coming out of the pandemic
you know that
um there is a increased appetite for hey
how are we going to use all this data
and what's the strategy going to be
behind it in that and i think that
naturally more and more leadership
positions will be created because you ha
you're going to have to have some
leadership around it um
and you're going to have to have folks
leading it that have no enough don't
have to be technical experts but know
enough about what's technically possible
you know to kind of meet the broader
needs of the organization or recommend
um you know changes to the broader meet
the broader needs of the organization so
i just think naturally
more leadership roles will develop you
know you might have to be a little bit
of patient
a little patient with it but i am
starting to see more and more of those
leadership roles put out there and i
expect that very soon we're going to
have a lot more of them
what what perspective on it avery no i
no i agree with you um yeah i
and i also i also misread the question
at first you you are right that data
science careers are being saturated
in entry-level roles so it's not that
they're that data science is saturated
it's that
there's not there's not a whole lot of
senior roles or leadership roles
and um first off i had never heard that
before so that's that's news to me if it
is happening
but i i'm of the belief that um
data roles and data careers are only
getting a bigger bigger bigger
agreement i don't i don't think it's
saturated some people think data science
is hatred
i don't think we're even close because
like you said i think some companies are
just getting started you know
absolutely um and so for instance if we
take let's i mean
let's take let's take snow data science
let's take my company for instance right
um hopefully someday i'll have full-time
people helping me
you know um and so i'll need maybe i'll
hire two people
and then at that point you know since
i've hired two people maybe i hired two
more so now i have four people
and now all of a sudden that's a lot of
people to manage so i need i need some a
senior data scientist or a lead like a
data science
manager or something like that so i
think naturally as you get
more data positions that's going to
create
more you know vacancies for leadership
because you just just the nature of
having so many people
you're going to need more senior people
and i think a lot of those jobs are
actually going to go
to pretty young people because like
think about it if
if like let's say you know 10 years ago
this started taking off right
like or let's just even say now let's
just say like this data career company i
don't know
let's take mcdonald's i know they have
data scientists let's just take
mcdonald's
they're like oh this data science thing
seems useful let's start they hire
you know let's say two data scientists
you know maybe
it really really takes off it starts
providing value for the business
five years down the road they're going
to be like oh
we have 20 data scientists now right and
we need a manager who's the manager well
it's probably the first person they
hired
who's only been you know with the
company two years that person can be
pretty young
you know so i think more data roles are
are coming in the future i don't think
we're at saturation
um and i think i think they're you know
they're important to have someone that
is in leadership that understands
analytics that's a that's a good role
to be in yeah i know for sure and i i
think that um you know i've
read some speculation that you know more
folks that have more of that
or have come up through kind of more of
an analytics background through a
business or organization you know may
start to
make their way into you know c-suites
you know executive level positions
whatever you want to call it i think
it's starting to happen but um you know
i think it'll happen
uh more frequently um but um
you know i think another recommendation
that i would make there is there's a
um excellent podcast out there um
called the data chief um i don't know if
you listen to it um avery but
um um it's uh it's
it's all about kind of um these data
leadership topics and kind of
keeping an eye on where the the puck is
going you know if you kind of want to
skate towards
um where the puck is going from a data
leadership perspective that's um one
that i
listen to um pretty regularly and some
good topics good guess there so
for folks that are really thinking about
getting into leadership
uh i suspect that's where the question
came from there you know that's one that
i would
um check out um but don't don't forget
about the data career podcast either
you really you need you have to you have
to keep all of them in your arsenal here
yeah you have to listen to every episode
of the data curve
absolutely otherwise you're going to get
fired that's what that's what your boss
told me
just kidding we say that just because
it's it's very focused on on kind of the
data yeah and transformational change in
that yeah that
yeah obvious that's very interesting
i'll have to check it out we don't
obviously in data career podcast touched
too much on leadership
you're you're our first our first data
leadership
guest topic i would say pressure
pressure is on yeah
hey well that you're doing great so far
i think
um we did it we did have another
question here we'll take it if you don't
mind from
from gulnar gulnar says i feel lost
sometimes in the process of learning
i wonder if it is because my background
is unrelated i'm coming from a biology
background
and still guessing that people from
related backgrounds do not lose
during the learning process how should i
handle it
yeah so if you're coming from another
background but you want to kind of
get into analytics or use analytics to
you know kind of move the needle in
whatever
function it is that you're working in a
company you know i definitely folks will
will have feedback like that to me
from other functions and other companies
i've worked in and i would say
you know try to pick one thing to start
out with you know
try to whether it's a a skill or a tool
you know or or hopefully i mean we've
encouraged you enough to maybe think
about or ideate a project that you could
use data for
or maybe you find that through searching
for you know what other examples that
other folks have
done from a project standpoint in the
function or field that you're in but
um start with one thing crawl walk run
with it you know just see
sometimes you'd be surprised what you
could do by dedicating a few hours a
week to
um you know trying to bring that project
to life on your own you know
learn a couple skills to create kind of
that basic proof of concept around
it and um you know go from there i think
um it does start with a small step you
know it's you're not gonna
have 10 years worth of analytics
experience overnight if you came from a
different field but
you still can make an impact with it in
your current role that's the cool thing
about
um all of the resources that are out
there on linkedin
youtube you know i mean there's tons of
places
to find information and education around
how to implement
project concepts and analytics
regardless of what field you're in and
so
um you know just dedicate a little bit
of time to it and get some experience
with it and share
don't be shy about sharing what you're
doing either you know i mean sometimes
folks have to know that you're
interested in something
before maybe they'll give you a manager
or something will give you more time to
work on it
or to you know do some other
professional development activity with
it you know but to start with a small
step
is my um advice and and then the same
thing is avery's question about the
manager of a business you know what
would you say to them
i would say the same thing to you you
know just stay immersed with
what's going on with analytics you know
dedicate a few minutes a week to it and
set some alerts for
you know content that's appearing from
you know folks that are doing stuff in
your field with analytics
be surprised probably what ideas you
come up with and get logged in the
journal
yeah 100 i agree with everything you
said
um gulnar i don't think biology is a bad
background to get into data science at
all
it's just like dustin said figuring out
how you can combine your domain
knowledge
with data to to combine the two
and become a superhero in your industry
um in biology definitely check out
genomics
you know dna sequencing there's a ton of
there's a ton of
data science in genomics um
and that could be a really good entry
place for you i actually think sometimes
having a non-related background
is an advantage when breaking into data
science because
you have domain knowledge um and i
always i'll share the story really
quickly
while i was at exxon i competed with
pure purebred phd data scientists
versus me at the time i didn't even i
just had a
bachelor's in chemical engineering and
we'd have these data science
competitions
and they were obviously really smart but
i could keep up with them sometimes
because they
they didn't know anything about oil they
knew nothing about oil you know
and i knew i knew everything i needed to
know about oil and so that gave me a
huge advantage
i could just know how the how the data
and like what things actually meant
um they never knew if sulfur was good or
bad for oil and that's like
sulfur bad for oil that was like
automatic for me so having domain
knowledge
or having unrelated background you know
you don't have a cs degree on a math
degree it's not the end of the world it
actually might be an advantage to be
honest
um okay we got uh i know we we're almost
out of time here but we got one more
question i think would be good
to ask someone like you who's more of
like in the leadership position right
so this is brian fellow exxon mobil
employee turned data scientist here
with so much of the data science process
being centered around preparing dirty
data 80
of the time just a side note i i don't
believe in that stat at all i don't
like any data scientists i've talked to
like most the time they're not spending
80
cleaning their data but i know i know
it's like a thing that that's
that's how much time data scientists
spend cleaning their data i just don't
think it's true but okay
how do you combat the need the need
value now demand for management
i think that was a top paying point for
data analytics project i was leading
so i'll um i'll
i'll generalize this in in the data
world
we want to bring value quickly but
sometimes you don't even have the data
you need and it can take you
a year or years to get the data it can
take you months to clean it
prep it and then months to analyze it
how do you bring value immediately
with kind of this long supply chain slow
part of the data what do you think yeah
for sure so i appreciate the question
and it's one that i've certainly
grappled with myself
um over my time in the field um you know
i think
the biggest thing is is um you do have
to work with what you have
you know and so um if you
only have 50 percent of what you need
but you can deliver something that adds
value with the 50
i think you over deliver with the
you know the 50 you know you create
something that would be useful
uh value to your peers business
superiors whatever
using what you have and then i think you
know um that will probably
impress folks because usually folks
don't know
you know exactly what they're asking for
and so um if you can do a really good
job with what you do have
you know and then be honest about you
know
what your needs are to me you know the
full scope or maybe beyond
the original scope of the project you
know i think that that's very helpful
but i think that
what's really important about that um
just from a personal perspective is i
think
um when you're honest about it you know
um
don't don't um come at it from a
complaining perspective you know come at
it from
you know hey here's what i'm able to do
here's what i don't have
you know and so because of what i don't
have i can't do this part of it
you know but here's how we could do it
you know and here's
um a plan that i have over the next 12
months of how we could get there
you know and and by the way we could
deliver this in two months
if i had a b and c you know so that
would be kind of my
model for you know the question that was
asked here totally appreciate it
is there a perfect answer to it no um
it's always going to be situational but
i would say deliver what you can
do really really good at what you're
delivering with what you can
and then um come back with constructive
feedback on why you can't deliver the
rest of it immediately
but also offer some expertise because
they may not know
you know i know right on how you can get
there with the rest of it
and give a timeline that's realistic but
then also tell them if there's things
you can do to pull that timeline up
tell them what they are you might be
surprised sometimes they might give you
what you need to make you know maybe
yeah
that sounds like a great time to ask for
some funding you know like
like oh yeah it sucks it's gonna take
two years but you give me
x amount of dollars i'll have it done in
six months right
yeah that's the thing is sometimes it is
it is having to and this goes to the
kind of seeking person to understand you
know if you ask folks um
i know that this doesn't work with every
person you know but if you ask them a
little bit more
um you know about kind of why they need
it within a certain time frame or why
they're asking you know maybe maybe the
original
task that they have is not even exactly
what they were looking for so i would
always
encourage you to on top of what i just
said stay curious you know and really
try to dig into what it is that's that's
needed you know
um and and just be constructive um and
your feedback back in terms of if you
can't deliver all of it right away what
can you deliver
what could you deliver um to meet the
full scope of what was needed you know
under what timeline and um what would
you need to
to get there you know again does it
what's the saying where you know it's um
you know it doesn't it never hurts to
ask right worse they can say
right yeah exactly and i like what you
said earlier
you know crawl crawl walk run if
if you're trying to build a data project
that's let's say let's go back to your
car analogy you know
that you're maybe trying to build a
you know a lamborghini that's like okay
we'll deliver the tricycle first
you know right and then and then once
the tricycle's there and it's delivering
a little value you know
soup it up and and make it a i don't
know uh
bicycle and then once it's a bicycle you
know you make it a a civic and then once
it's a civic
you make it something nicer and you you
know you build up over the years until
you finally get to the point
of the delivered lamborghini but you
know you're getting incremental value
from the tricycle
in in the meantime so you know start
start by crawling before you're
sprinting
right yep and just remember that you
know you were hired into the position
that you're in to be an expert in that
position you know and so
um you're also hired because not
everybody has that expertise right and
so
um sometimes when folks ask for things
they just they just don't know
you know and so they just don't know
that it's not capable and so
it's not a bad thing to always
constructively you know explain
what we can do um what we could do and
what it's gonna take to get there
um i know it takes a little bit of
courage sometimes to do that
um and it's situational you know whether
you know what's appropriate and what's
not but um you know i think um
i think you'd be surprised sometimes how
folks respond to that
i love it i love it that that is great
advice so hopefully hopefully that helps
brian
um dustin we're almost at our time limit
i want to respect your time
i got one last question for you ready
yeah
all right last question bucks went in
tonight
we gotta go with bucks in six bucks and
six they're winning tonight so
i think i think 50-year drought is over
yeah
all right well avery i'm also praying
i'm
trying to pray forget about the
analytics and all that it's it's it's
time to pray for that win
okay well if you are listening to this
podcast episode
after tuesday july 20th
you and you like basketball i guess you
will know whether the bucks
won or not um and we can make fun of
dustin or celebrate with right exactly
yeah
that's awesome well dustin thank you so
much i learned a lot
about leadership principles and data and
how to be
you know a data manager and some i hope
everyone else who is
who is listening also got some awesome
tips um
thank you so much for joining the data
career podcast man i really appreciate
it
yeah for sure always great talking with
you and i appreciate everything just
that you're doing for the community you
know i talked
about the importance of being part of
the analytics community and um
you do so much so i su i really
appreciate it i do encourage folks if
you're listening to follow
avery in this podcast um lots of
valuable information and someone
that i can attest is he is very
passionate about this and that is so
so needed so thank you to you too hey
thanks man for sure
and uh i'll i'll go ahead and throw your
uh
linkedin profile into the show notes so
if you're listening connect with dustin
by clicking that and i think that's it
you got anything else dustin you good
no i don't if you have questions feel
free to connect with me
you know and reach out and i'm always up
for for uh helping folks out with data
so
thanks again for having me yeah for sure
and thanks to everyone else who is who
is watching live
um i know we had john here we had
bartese
havreet jason
brian thank you guys for listening and
of course uh you can always check this
out on spotify or
apple podcast at the data career podcast
all right everyone
thank you guys have a great tuesday yeah
see you guys

Title: Ask Avery - DATA CAREER JUMPSTART LAUNCHES 8/18

Description: Come tune in to the ASK AVERY SHOW!!!!!!

Video Transcript:
[Music]
what's up everyone
how's it going happy uh
what day is it today tuesday happy
tuesday everyone
um i am going live here
for another episode of the uh the ask
avery show
um hope you guys are doing good
um my guest today actually didn't end up
joining so i have a free session
so if you want to talk to me say hello
so i see on instagram we got taroum
sorry about that i just exited it out
there for a second
we got tyroon 16 feb how are you doing
um hopefully you're doing good you got a
question for me to roon 16
feb um anyone else if you're watching
good morning
say hello go ahead and ask me any
question you want
you can ask me about uh data science you
can ask me about
linkedin you can ask me about careers
you can ask me anything you would like
so
i see some people we got on instagram we
got shay rath sajuari
rich weed what's up how are you guys
doing if you're watching on
linkedin or uh youtube go ahead and say
hello
in the comments and uh yeah let's let's
talk i got
you know 10 minutes or so we can take on
any sort of data science questions
that you guys have um while i'm waiting
for the questions go ahead and throw
them in the comments
um go ahead and throw them in the
comments and
i'll take them but in the meantime i'm
going to be talking about something that
i'm working on right now
um maybe i'll actually even uh well i
don't know if it's too interesting i'll
share anyways i'm going to share my
screen real fast
but once again if you have a question go
ahead and ask me throw it in the
comments
but in the meantime i'll show you guys
what i've been working on
so oh what's up joe's here
what's up joe good morning how are you
i'm good how are you doing
good man figured i'd pop in for a few
minutes so
yeah for sure for those who don't know
this is uh joe reese we're uh we're
neighbors kinda right
kind of yeah same town so yeah yeah
exactly so uh he's a great reference a
great person to follow
for all things data engineering right
um how's your book going you've been
working on the book yeah
working on the book um first couple
chapters will be
available for um the early release on
o'reilly
maybe as soon as next week so are you
serious yeah
so wow out i mean that be careful you
might learn something
so what what are the first few chapters
on
uh it covers um what is data engineering
what do data engineers do um data
engineering life cycle
as well as the undercurrents of data
engineering stuff like data management
software engineering
architecture orchestration et cetera so
it's gonna be dope
look forward to it okay sweet that's
super exciting i'll definitely have to
check that out
um i'm notoriously um i've told andreas
kretz this i don't know if i've told you
this
but i'm a bad data engineer i'm a data
scientist who's not good at data
engineering that is for sure
so i'll have to check it out we did have
a question here
let's see from oh now i'm underneath
this from kishon
long long question hi avery i love
working in the data space specifically
data analytics and i want to get better
at data science but i feel
the programming and struggle at times so
it demoralizes me sometimes any advice
on how to get better at it
any books to recommend i'm going to
throw it straight to joe
joe what what are your thoughts there um
i mean programming is intimidating i
think i i think a lot of data scientists
have this
kind of apprehension about getting good
at programming
um you know it is intimidating i think i
think there's some good
references out there i always um think
like
obviously learn how to code that just
comes down to a lot of practice there's
no way around it
but then there's i think good references
clean code uh rob martin's awesome
um what else pragmatic programmers one
of the better books of
red on programming and between those two
i think you get a good context of not
just
you know the tactical part of
programming which is
you know uh plunking away on a keyboard
and
uh you know making uh code but also like
what's the craft of code
right like yeah um because it is it is
very much like a craft like like
woodworking or something and so you
really gotta
uh yeah like garrett cisco says
repetition repetition repetition in the
comments is so true
sorry my dog's upstairs um i mean it's
just it's just about repetition really
um and if you're out of it you know
sometimes like riding a bike and
sometimes it's
you get really rusty and that's just how
it is but just keep practicing
it's like anything what do you think
yeah no i i totally agree
um i think your answer was more like uh
i don't know i don't want to say
theoretical but more useful maybe than
mine because
my answer is you just you just do it
like you never get good at it
right you just you just always do it and
you suck at it the first time you do it
and then you suck a little less and then
you suck a little less and then you suck
a little less
until one day you know you don't suck as
bad as it used to suck
and that's like programming for me like
there's still
like there's still days i mean you
should see my search history sometimes
joe
like you'd be embarrassed for me
like i searched for the dumbest things
like how to split column
by comma in pandas data frame like
i always forget how to code basically
but the point is is you just suck a
little less every day
well we all do it i think those you know
google things you can google it i think
are forgivable in some ways because it's
like unless it's
sometimes you get the muscle memory for
certain commands but other times if
you're not doing it enough
i think coding is one of those things in
programming is it's more
to me it's more of a thought process can
you like logically deconstruct an idea
and make it work in code but when it
comes to commands and stuff like i
always look up the dumbest things as
well
and um yeah so i mean i think those
those sorts of things are
i would give somebody a pass if you're
having to google like
even innocuously stupid things to you
might be you know it's it's uh
just you can't be expected to know every
single command um
and you know in the api that's uh if you
do i kind of you know i would wonder
what you're
not spending your time doing yeah yeah
exactly that's not the most important
thing maybe to spend our time in
i did like well also what derek said
here he said and projects
and and keyshawn that's something you
know when i've been learning how to
program
you can either learn how to program and
have fun while doing it or kind of hate
it at the same time
and i think one way to have more fun is
to do so
via be a project or something you're at
least excited about
right like you could program something
you
you're like that's why i have a lot of
issues with like the way that people
teach programming a lot online
it's like oh okay like here's this made
up thing with like this
thing that has no value it's like oh
let's rearrange these
letters inside of this list and that's
good
i guess but i rather have at least a
purpose like oh
like i'm doing this for a project that
i'm excited about have you felt that
before joe
yeah i totally agree i mean it's once
you have to have a kind of a vested
interest in it to keep your attention
um otherwise you spend your entire life
doing homework
yeah no it's much more fun to do like
something
you have like a passion for um so yeah
maybe keyshawn if there's something
you're really like excited about
maybe you like sports or maybe you like
i don't know guitars i don't know try to
find some sort of a project
based around a hobby and i think that
makes learning a lot more fun it feels
less of a chore and more of a joy so
hopefully those are some projects i
don't know about you but how many how
many products
projects do you have like 80 completed
right yeah like my laptop is full of
these it's just this graveyard of like
projects that just
you know you almost got there and the
ones that you know that i always
finished were the ones that was really
interested in
the ones that were kind of like whatever
you know toy projects
yeah they you always learn something new
along the way i would say regardless
right but it's kind of true
for sure um and and i mean even if it's
80
i think it's a great thing to have on an
online portfolio um
i was talking to matt francis the other
day and he actually
applied for a job and he used a project
that was like
60 percent finished and they loved it
they loved just that he'd like worked on
it he thought about it
and was like trying new things so i i
even think you know
even if you never finish the project and
you're just you're just using it as a
way to learn
you can also use it as a way to you know
start a conversation
with interviewers and recruiters and
stuff like that so they're they're
multifaceted
that's why i'm a big fan so i guess
that's true though is a project ever
truly done i mean because if you start a
company off of
a project i mean you end up hiring
engineers and then it just
ends up morphing into something else so
i guess there's a counter argument that
um you could set a goal of what i guess
is defined as being done
maybe for the purpose of that project as
it stands today but if it manages to be
successful
i i don't know that it has actually ever
finished i mean yeah there's there's the
what is it oscam's razor or whatever
it's called
yeah yeah yeah yeah and it's like you
never really finish anything
like and you can i mean you can kind of
go to parade a principle that you get 80
percent
of the value with that first 20 of the
work right so
you never are done with something and
it's never perfected but there's always
a good time to be like okay
i've done enough where i can put this on
my resume i can put this on my portfolio
and i can put it on a shelf and maybe
move on to something you know
i've learned a lot of value from this
maybe not all the value but you know
eighty percent of the value
that's a good a good point to move on to
something else maybe yeah for sure
hey i gotta jump to a uh uh my stand up
right now but no problem
to the show real quick and say hi i
think so yeah well thanks for joining
me we'll talk later bye joe all right
that was kind of fun
um derek said i think i've told avery
about my fantasy football stat
projections project
no you've never told me about that derek
come on derek you gotta teach me about
these things
um but yeah enjoying the content does
help 100
i agree okay any other questions on the
askgaver show this morning
um go ahead and throw them in the
comments i'll probably take one or two
more so go ahead and throw them in if
you would like
in the meantime while i'm waiting i am
this is my script right here for my
latest video
that i'll be creating this is my secret
to having a good linkedin profile
so update your linkedin is what this is
called um
and on thursday you guys will
if you're signed up for updates for data
career jumpstart if you're not
go sign up right now because on thursday
i'm sending out a mini course
so i'm sending out three videos that are
from data career jumpstart
um which is my data science boot camp
program and i'll be sending out updates
uh on thursday that includes a video
explaining basically how to three steps
that you can take to land
awesome data science jobs or any sort of
tech job to be honest it doesn't need
not even just data science but
how can i improve my my linkedin so that
i can receive these types of emails and
offers and head hunts and recruiters
in my inbox so i'm really excited about
this video i think it's gonna be really
helpful
um and yeah i mean to be honest
yesterday or two days ago now i got an
offer from aws i guess not an offer an
offer to interview from aws
amazon which a lot of people would be
stoked about
um and i i'm obviously you know i'm not
going to take it because i'm happy doing
what i'm doing right now
but i mean that's a great company if i
think if i were to go back to work
amazon would be a great place
to work so anyways i'm i'm gonna try to
help you guys get more of these types of
offers inside of your linkedin inbox
every day
with three simple steps so go to
dataqueerjumpstart.com and sign up for
notifications
if you haven't already um okay well it
doesn't seem like anyone else has
any more questions
any questions all right no problem
person who was supposed to come today
didn't show up they have a baby so maybe
their baby or maybe they got stuck in
traffic or something
hopefully they're doing okay but i'll be
back tomorrow morning
well i'll be back this afternoon with
dustin shinemick we're going to be doing
a
data career podcast interview with him
he is the director
of analytics at the master lock company
and then tomorrow morning at 8 30 looks
like i'll be talking to someone named
dominic
so hopefully they show up uh appreciate
all you guys for tuning in
hope you guys have a great day i'll see
you guys back on a couple hours if you
guys want to join an episode
of the data career podcast with dustin
shimek all right
peace out everyone have a good day talk

Title: Mark Freeman II - Don't Make This $20,000 Data Science Mistake!

Description: Listen to Mark Freeman explain how you can avoid this $20,000 data science mistake! Mark will also be chatting about his journey into data! Don't miss it!

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
what's up everyone happy friday i was
just live
just like an hour ago and i said i'd see
you after the weekend totally forgot
that i had this awesome interview
set up for the data career podcast with
mark freeman
so i'm back sorry guys uh mark
welcome to the data career podcast hey
thanks thanks for having me i'm super
excited to be here
yeah guys if you guys don't know mark
definitely find him on
linkedin mark freeman connect with them
really good resource for the data
science community
definitely someone you want to have uh
in your network you want to check out
his posts they're really good
i'm going to give a quick bio about mark
and then we'll get right into
interviewing him and asking him some
questions because he has a lot to
share but before we get going if you are
watching live
go ahead and throw a hello into the
comments
mark and i want to know who's watching
and say hello to you guys as you join in
all right so mark is a data scientist
for a company called humu
he has a master's in community health
from stanford school of medicine guys
stanford that's that's the stanford and
an undergrad in sociology from uc davis
mark is a fantastic resource in the data
community and i'm super excited that
he's here and that we can ask him some
questions
so here we go mark you ready ready
thanks for that intro yeah of course all
right so
i guess tell us a little bit more about
this company
and this role you have right now for
humu what do you do well first off what
is humu and then what do you do
yeah so humu is a roughly 100 person
startup in the bay area
um we're an hr tech company and so
essentially we have these things called
nudges uh which are a little mini
behavior change interventions that we
send to
employees uh i think like once a week or
so
and through those little mini behavior
chains we drive kind of like
uh organization strategy for improving
work um
and culture um so it's really cool
because i work with a whole bunch of
uh you know psychologist io psychologist
who are extremely smart
and also some amazing talented engineers
and together
you know we have these science facts
kind of uh
little packets of information that help
people hopefully be happier
um and improve in their work and um in
my role um i have kind of three aspects
in
how i support that um the first one is i
build data products so
this is probably one of the my favorite
things to do in my role is i actually
built like production level
code and i collaborate with engineering
to um
create kind of data insight products
that go to our end users and customers
um so that's been like a huge learning
opportunity for me
um for the past year the second thing i
do is i do uh product analytics so i get
a lot of our log data
um to work with engineering to determine
like what logs to capture
and how to bring that into our data
warehouse and then i
do various one-off reports i'll create
dashboards
and many times i'll help the our vp of
product help make that decisions
so they'd be like hey mark you know
what's happening what's this channel for
our product can you tell me more
some create some insights and really try
to build a nice data narrative data
story for them
to have more informed decisions how to
move forward or product and then finally
it's been like a lot of my life for the
past uh
few months is i do a lot of data
infrastructure so think about elt
pipelines
um the schema within our data warehouse
all with the goal of how can i create a
framework and system
to bring more data access company wide
um so that's kind of the main things
i do um and it's probably been one of
the best jobs
i've had and i've grown so much as a
data scientist because i have an amazing
team
amazing manager and like i feel like
very mission purpose
um that i build tools to help people be
happy in their job which is fun
yeah that is so interesting there's a
lot to unpack there so let's
let's take it one by one let's start
with this whole nudging thing okay
so yeah who is sending nudge to
employees what what is a nudge like what
what would be a nudge that i could have
received today definitely so actually i
think
um you know they're they're on our
linkedin page for
um humu and also i think you can sign up
for like test nudges you can receive a
good example of it
but um a nudge but i'm just making
something up
um because we have psychologists who are
much better at creating these things for
me but
um this example is you know
um hey you're about to be on a podcast
write three things down of clear
messaging you want to um prepare for
so you can like do your best job right
um
so something along those lines where it
it takes note of what you're about to
currently do and sometimes you'll
receive nudges where your managers
receive a nudge and you'll receive a
complimentary nudge before you have like
a one-on-one
so there's various different things and
like long-term wise like support for
data scientists how we can impact this
like
what's the most impactful nudge
at the right time can we send someone um
to drive behavior change that's a really
interesting data problem that we're
working towards
yeah wow okay very interesting um
so it integrates with with your calendar
or your schedule in some way it kind of
knows what you're doing
no not that's not yeah i don't know
that's on our product roadmap right here
okay yeah i was just giving a sample
eventually that's the idea man that
would be cool
that would be cool i'll bring that back
too though
yeah i could see like yeah
that i could see that getting kind of
interesting too
because it could be like oh you have a
meeting with joe coming up and joe has
like a little bit of a red personality
just like remember
he doesn't always mean what he says i
don't know i think that there's
so many opportunities i think that the
key thing with my role currently is like
thinking strategically like what data
signals can we capture
what product features can we build to
like make people want to engage and like
provide that data because it's the trust
between us um you know giving us your
data but also us providing those key
insights um
so it's it's an interesting problem
being at this stage of like an early
stage kind of data strategy and data
implementation of things uh because you
know i'm like
facebook or amazon some large company
they have all this data so there's like
mining through it
for us for like we have to create the
data and so
uh it's it's really interesting uh being
at this stage for a data scientist
yeah that's super cool um there's
there's a lot we can get into there
because it sounds like yeah i working
for a small company
in a startup you do a lot of like you
said you wear a lot of hats
you have a lot of different activities
um so we can definitely
get into that uh later in the pod but
i'd love
i love to well i'd love to say hello to
everyone watching
so we have uh abuyodin
thanks for watching and we got blaine
prickett
i think blade and i met on on tick tock
actually so what's good blaine i'm
amazing
yeah i know i love how do you like that
platform i'm like oh
i love tick tock it sucks up so much of
my time so i
i shouldn't love it as much as i should
uh but i
it's fascinating okay um i'd love to
hear
how you got to humu but let's go all the
way back
like how did you get into data in the
first place because
you know we went back to your bio we had
an undergrad in sociology
and i think a master's in community
health or something like that
so how did you end up where you're at
because it doesn't seem like that was
the path
i don't know there's actually like a
linear path somehow
uh of just following my passions but uh
for the longest
i thought i was gonna get a doctor and
so i did my undergrad
sociology but i was also taking pre-med
courses uh um
fun fact i wasn't the best student so
like i found a lot of my science classes
um and so i was actually applying to
postbacks to
improve your gpa to get into medical
school and um at the same time i was
working at stanford at the social impact
center the hot center for public service
and i was like does stanford have an mph
program let me check it out and they did
it but they had this thing called
community health prevention research and
i read it and i was like wow
this is exactly what i want to do with
my career medicine and health care
and it just aligned so well so i applied
as a long shot i wasn't even planning on
trying to go to get my master's or
anything
that's the only program i applied to and
i got in um the funny thing though is
once i got in i was at the school of
medicine i was
taking classes across the medical
students i realized i did not like grad
school
i loved learning but the process of grad
school is just so
growing for me and i was like i can't do
four more years of this
i i don't want to be a doctor anymore um
which is like a big thing because all my
mentors were doctors all my peers were
going to medical school
and so just really shifting away and
just starting over again
um not fully starting over but like
starting over with my connections in my
network because it's going to be a
completely different industry
um and so top of my head i was like all
right i can code in
r i have these research skills
experimental design skills
i'm at stanford where it's very embedded
in tech
um but more importantly i have the
sociology background and things that got
into healthcare is for community impact
and so i was thinking
you know we called like the social
determinants of health you know there's
all these different
uh community aspects that drive your
health so where you live
your access to things and so i was
thinking to myself like
where are these disparities going to be
embedded and scaled up in the future
and it really hit me personally i was
like wow it's going to be data data's
driving so many different aspects of our
lives
um and the things that are training
these models training
and forming these decisions are based
off data that has a lot of bias in it
may not include people may reaffirm like
old laws that are
maybe uh um discriminatory uh
and i was like i need to get involved in
this and so this became my passion like
i want to get a data science
to actually have like social impact at
scale
and this seemed like combined all my
skill sets with my love for business
social impact and all these different
things um
and so that's that was the start of like
i want to become a data scientist
surprisingly after my master's i i
didn't get into a data role
my first job out of my master's is in an
operations role
and uh at a health tech company for like
health insurance
i'm out of all things but i took the
train
i took the train from uh palo alto which
is where stanford's at to san francisco
if i'm in the bay area and that's an
hour train ride each way
and i start teaching myself python on
the train okay hold on hold on
you knew r already though right yeah i
knew r already because
from undergrad from grad school all my
stats classes just assumed
your new r and so the lectures were in r
the tests were an r and i didn't know r
so it was like i want to be a data
scientist i need against this class to
take all these advanced statistics
courses
i'm i guess i have to learn r and so i
just self-taught myself so i was
i was passionate about it then i was
just obsessed with learning r
learning statistics i wasn't good at
first i was just persistent uh i spent
like 20 hours outside of class
teaching myself r um uh brandon bolt his
youtube page was how i learned
statistics
who's who's sorry who is that brandon
fultz uh
he i did a live stream with him i think
last month
uh but and i was like that was like such
a full circle moment because i looked up
to him so much because he like taught me
statistics
yeah it got me prepared for my grad
school level courses
uh so so yeah that's how i learned ours
just through uh my grad program but also
forcing myself to be in positions where
i had to learn are so i took the stats
course that required it
for my thesis i said i'm going to do a
statistical analysis even though i don't
know statistics yet
if i make this my thesis it's going to
push me to do it anyways
okay i love a couple things about that
one i love that you were taking classes
that you were not
qualified for at all i i love that you
know it's like oh yeah this is
ours a requirement oh yeah i know that
and it's like you'll just figure it out
along the way
i think yeah that that uh i don't know
if it's a skill
or it's a characteristic but the ability
to
just be like you know what i can figure
it out everything that i need to figure
out as i go
um i think that serves people really
well in the data community so that's
that's really cool
um okay so then
so then okay so then you graduate and
you get a job
at some health insurance something or
other uh health insurance tech company
doing operations and are you leaders
where are you living
uh still in the bay area so i was still
in uh
and palo alto which is right next to
stanford um
because i still i still have my housing
that was super cheap over there
yeah but my job is in san francisco so
it has a thing called caltrain which is
the train that goes both ways and so
hour each way and i was like i'm gonna
teach myself python on the train i'm
using most of my hour
why did you want to learn python you
already knew r yeah well
the thing is is learning about data
science i was like well i need to know r
and i need to know python and a lot of
the job descriptions show both
and i thought it would be a good skill
to have to know python
um especially for like scripts my
understanding back then
was like you know rs for statistics
pythons for like
building applications yeah okay so
you saw it on job drop requirements
you're like i'm gonna learn them both
at this point how did i mean like you
you kind of knew you wanted to go in
data
into data because you wanted to use
those those three things you said
earlier
like get the sociology and the health
and you had kind of these programming
skills you thought why not is that why
you were drawn towards data science or
why were you drawn towards data science
i think it brought provide the
combination of statistics which i just
fell in love with
um coding uh business um business and
finally
um scaling social impact
okay those okay because it did all of
that one job
um because i love talking to people i
love making connections and
communicating things
and so statistics and coding by itself
won't allow me to do that so data
science was this bridge to let me engage
in all these assets aspects of my life
that i enjoyed
okay so okay now now i'm a little more
clear you have these four things going
on in your head
you're like these four things i want to
do data science seems like a great place
to do all four of those things
and you're commuting an hour every day
so you're learning python
okay so keep going what happens next i'm
ready definitely so i start i'm in
operation so a lot of the works in excel
i start automating my workflows with
python after i learned it
um so big shout out to pandas uh
really really helped me out with that
and i started sharing with my colleagues
and they start automating their work so
i was like saving like
tens of hours a week through these
python scripts i built just that i just
learned a couple months ago
um and so that was happening at the same
time i was like
i have this mentality of like if i give
an employer 40 hours i'm going to invest
myself 10 hours
so that was the python and i was like i
really want to jump in and understand
this data career is actually a good fit
for me
i picked up a second job as a research
data analyst that's back at stanford
um for 10 hours a week i always do r
statistics
and run these analyses for this research
lab
and that was my first jump in by like a
career as a data professional
and it proved two things for me one i
was capable of doing this as a job
but more importantly i really enjoyed it
and
it really started to click and click in
my head i was like wow by the hour
i'm being paid more as a data analyst
i enjoy this way more like i just i need
to jump in and make this happen
oh interesting so you still had your
your full-time job
yeah but then you took on this part-time
job which was at the university
which i'm guessing had pretty lacks you
know pretty
pretty pretty uh loose uh structure in
terms of when you work and where you
work is that true or exactly it was
remote and just tracked my own colors
yeah and it was all through video so
before pandemic time
you know i was already doing the remote
thing and the thing is like
you you build a reputation about
yourself so like they asked my
my uh former professors and also i had
another recommendation from someone who
worked in a lab they're like yeah we
trust mark
um he'll get the job done okay you never
know who's watching and who can be a
connection who can advocate for you
it's so true and it was interesting
because it was in the same department as
my grad program
so before they hired me they say like
the the person who's gonna be my manager
for that role
she uh she went to my old stats
professor and it was just such a full
circle moment for me because she said
you know we're going to take a risk on
you because you've never had statistics
world before
so i went to your old professor and
asked how was mark and
and this professor actually helped me
out on my thesis quite a bit
and he's like he's like one of the best
stats students i've ever had um
which is like so wild to me because i
was like i struggled so much early on
but because i was so persistent and kept
on asking for help and built this
relationship with this
um i ended up learning quite a bit um
for this
and so that that kind of buy-in got me
that job
that's such a good point because the the
best jobs
you get in your life are ones you never
apply for
it's it's it's so true it's the ones
that were
you just utilize your network and this
this person's looking for someone and
you can do that those
those always end up the best jobs but
those jobs
are impossible to
try to get kind of because it takes like
a year of a relationship
building right and you just never know
what's going to come from each
relationship
like like you could have had no
relationship with your professor
and that would have led nowhere right
like nothing would have happened
but because you'd been putting time with
your professor you know
just as a genuine person asking him
questions or her
asking them questions them asking you
questions
um you know and just getting to know
each other that ended up leading to
a role that okay i haven't heard the end
of your story necessarily
but it sounds like this is a pretty
trans transformational role
and you know vital to your career yeah
it was a proof point for me because uh
and i'll go into this more but like
definitely had a lot of imposter
syndrome
i think grad school was really hard for
me um i almost dropped out
uh and it just took a lot out of me and
i just lost a lot of my confidence
after grad school and so uh you know
taking small steps i knew i would
succeed
but i lost that spark of life that i
that i will succeed if i try
and so it was just a nice step if i do
this can i succeed and
it gave me that positive kind of like
like a little mini hypothesis test like
will i do this right uh it was only 10
hours and it didn't work i was on a
small contract
yeah yeah exactly you
you this this is actually really
important with the rest of our
conversation
you dipped your toe in in a very low
risk
uh situations to figure out what the if
you liked it if it made sense for your
career
yeah okay okay keep going so you're at
this analyst job
you're you're like the pay is better the
work's more fun for me
yeah what's next um and so eventually
uh you know i was like all right i'm
gonna
make this jump and so i quit my
full-time job i still have my part-time
job as a data analyst
and i i did a data science bootcamp uh
oh wow you went straight into the boot
camp while keeping were you still 10
hours a week
at the analyst or yeah i was still 10
hours a week on the side
for that so uh so then i do do the boot
camp
and that that was an interesting
experience yeah
so um you decide okay i want to make
data
more of a role in my life you already
had a master's degree so that probably
ruled out the masters right
yeah i already had a master's degree i
had the experimental design i had the
statistics i don't know how to code in
python or you know code of r
so you were like i just need this to
happen and
it happened fast and it seemed like i
mean what what were you hoping to get
out of the boot camp i guess
i think the biggest thing um and i think
this alludes to
your the title of this is this 20k
mistake
i was trying to buy job connections um
and i i was trying to force this
situation
to get a job i felt like this was the at
that time i felt like that was the best
thing for me to do is pay this large sum
to go through this program to refine my
skills and get connected to the job
pipeline
to land a job so i thought it would
reduce my risk and
making it happen okay so that was that
was the most important thing to you was
like
i want to have you know good connections
and good
job leads coming out of this boot camp
because like you said
you knew you knew python you knew sequel
you had some of the stats
um so that's i mean that's a big part of
data science and i had a paid data role
where i was driving value
true i mean you already had some some
experience you didn't need
the first the first job's always kind of
the hardest so you kind of had the
uh the first the first job eddie and i
learned my operations were already into
a
into a uh into a data role it's all my
resume people just assumed that my
operations role was a data role because
i implemented all these python scripts
that drove value that's such a good
point
that and this is this is everyone who's
listening you really need to
take mark's example here was mark on
paper
when they handed you a contract was that
a data role
not at all i made it a data role and i
was very upfront
i told him i took that job i was like i
want to be a data scientist
um and i told every manager like that's
what i'm trying to do and it's really
cool is that
my manager at the time shout out to my
manager at that job
she used to be a software engineer and
she said like software engineer so he
went she went into management
and she like fully supported that she's
like yeah totally built this script
that'll be awesome
um looking back that was such a bad
script it was really
poor coke but they weren't software
engineers they didn't know
any difference either they're like cool
i run in the terminal
it works it gives me the excel output i
need and it saved me 10 hours
so i didn't care i'm with you yeah
that's uh that's very true of my
my first code that i wrote it man it
would not pass any sort of
quality but the key thing is that it did
an end-to-end task
and it drove value for my end user yeah
and that's all that counts
especially especially when it's not an
official data role
it's just like okay i am you're in
operations okay
but everyone whatever your role is
whatever industry you're in you know if
you're an engineer
if you're you know a scientist if you're
in operations whatever
you need to think okay i am a scientist
with
data skills i'm an engineer with data
skills
because i always say this i hate the
title data scientist
and i hate that it's like a data
scientist is someone who does data
science it's not true
that's like saying a mathematician are
the only people who do math and it's
like well no
there's so many roles that use math and
there's so many roles that can use data
science
and sometimes we just limit ourselves oh
since i'm not a data scientist i can't
do data science
but guys look at mark's example here he
had a role that
maybe didn't even have historically any
sort of significance in the data sense
but he found ways to improve and bring
value
while fulfilling his duties in that role
with the idea in the back of his head
i'm in operations
but i want to think and act like a data
scientist i think that's such a good
example and
people should really should really
emulate that yeah i mean and
going on to my linkedin that job was
collective health and to see how i put
the bullet points of how i describe my
role
and you can see for yourself how you can
literally do that and it's all about
spinning and selling yourself um that
was probably like five percent of my job
but i just highlighted those three
things because i was trying to go for a
greater career
yeah that's that's also a really good
skill to have right
were you a waiter or did you serve
hundreds of customers a day to give them
great satisfaction you know
it's like both of those things could be
true but it but the
the bullet points in your resume you
really need to tailor to the job
you want to have uh don't lie never lie
but stretch the truth or
or spin it or make it sound like you do
what you're saying yeah
yeah quick side note just one quick
tangent like yes service jobs has been
probably the most impactful thing for my
role in my corporate why because i had
so much customer service experience i
just know how to talk to people and sell
things now
um when you're a cashier you have to
upsell you know like hey you want those
extra pickles or something like that
like it's only 25 cents more
you ordered it last time you're here so
that that's a good point and um so yeah
never
never discount your your previous skills
even it's not like as fancy as a data
role like
i rely on my skills from food service
all the time
yeah that's that's a good point i don't
know if those skills are
as valued by recruiters as much as they
should be
because you are right that like you know
i've
through what i do now on linkedin and
talking to people you know i've talked
to
you know a couple hundred data
scientists um and not all of them have
the same
sociability that that you do mark like
data scientists are often really nerdy
and often really introverted
and it's hard for them to communicate
well and so if you can do
the technical side of data science and
you have like a personality and you're
like
sociable that goes a long way doesn't it
yeah and maybe you can't put on your
resume but
it gives you a confidence that you have
transferable skills succeed in a new
environment
yeah and once and and also a resume
is like it's it's like a stupid key to
to get into a door you have to like
twist it but but once you're in the door
the resume doesn't matter as much as
your personality so once you meet
someone face to face
communication really really stands out i
i liked
i liked that tangent that was that was a
good tangent um
okay so i just wanted to say uh eddie
martinez is here
a dominican based in liverpool um
what's good eddie i was just in the
dominican republic a month ago
very beautiful country um but he said
aboard the bootcamp express
um so yes mark you're getting on the
bootcamp express here
you sign up for this boot camp you're
looking for job leads how how was the
experience honestly um
it just wasn't a good experience for me
unfortunately uh
i think you know they're they're they're
a startup themselves
and so they're trying to figure out
things and i think just my
cohort i think the job pipeline just
wasn't there at the moment
and so uh you know the thing i paid for
uh you know it just didn't work out for
that round that was in
um it was pretty pretty unfortunate for
that so i have like really mixed
feelings about the boot camp i did
because
um you know i think i think if i was
more strategic and really thought about
it i don't think i would i would pay as
much as i did
for for that and so um that's why i say
like it's like a 20
mistake it was like 17k for my loan but
interest will probably be above 20k
um but i think you know and the biggest
thing is not it's not that much 100 on
me
um that's one of the key things i want
to highlight but i think i think three
main lessons really came was looking
back
i wrote them down because i didn't want
to forget is that
um i think the biggest thing is i didn't
do my due diligence
um for the program um you know
typically in california you have like
these uh like
required by law to give you like what's
the placement rate of people who
graduate
into into a role within like 90 days or
like one year or whatever maybe
um you could potentially interview
potential students on linkedin you could
like reach down and talk to them
um you could actually talk to the
program itself
to learn more and to often get a feel
for it right
um but i think the biggest thing is that
i didn't do a cost benefit
i was just so hyper focused on this one
program that i didn't consider like
what are the other problems i could do
with 17k right
so i think this program would have been
great if i didn't pay so much
uh for it um because i think i was
talking to other people like
17k you can get a whole masters out of
state school for that price
uh and actually i actually didn't
complete this program
um something that was interesting is i
so context wise i got married
i quit my job and i'm doing this program
and then my wife
unfortunately had some health issues
where she couldn't work anymore
she's okay now so like it was like a
sink or swim moment
and yeah i was like i need a job or
moving back into my parents room with my
wife
which is a great start for our marriage
everyone wants to live with their
in-laws the first the first year of
marriage that's for sure
yeah exactly um and so
i i came to a choice it's like if i if i
knew if i continued this program
i'll learn some cool data science stuff
but i won't get a job and i'll be in a
bad position
or switch gears and i make this program
maybe 25
of my time and other 75 percent i'm just
going hard on linkedin
and and applying for jobs and that bent
work worked out i ended up getting a job
outside of the program
um and you know i didn't i didn't get my
certificate from the program but
ultimately it all worked out
um so i think that was a due diligence i
think the other aspect looking back
is you know my decision was really
driven by insecurity
uh you know i said like after grad
school i really lost a lot of my
confidence so like
thinking about my skill set like r
python
i have put you know working professional
and data already part time
i was able to turn my other role into a
data role essentially
um you know have experimental design
with the masters like i had all the
skill set right
to to get in there um i just didn't have
the confidence i
i thought i just couldn't apply myself
um i thought i needed this extra extra
push
and i think this leads into the next
component was like i was just really
impatient
i wanted to happen now and if i was more
patient i probably could have saw like
hey i actually have a skill set
and if i augment in this cheaper way i
could probably get the same results
um it won't be as odd as quick as this
timeline i want it
and so i think looking back especially
for people and
trying to make this shift into a career
um a piece of advice i tell a lot of
people is that
the moment before you reach a goal is
when you're most vulnerable
um because you know it's it's a
frustrating time because like
i have the skill already like but i
don't have the results to show for it
and when you're so close that's that's
the peak of like your skill
before you break through and there's a
lot of frustration around that you're
like i want to have this happen now and
you know there's there's two things you
get frustrated and quit or
you get frustrated and you make bad
decisions or you rush decisions because
you're trying to push through
and i did the latter uh and
i just wasn't strategic but my career
choice thankfully it all worked out
i learned a lot from the program it just
didn't get the for what i paid for was
hoping to gain from it i
didn't get um but
you know it was just a lesson learned um
early in my career and
now i have this lovely loan i pay off
every month
yeah man i i'm sorry that happened but
i'm glad it all worked
out in the in the end for you and i
it's hard to know what happened if you
it's it's hard to
to go i mean right hindsight is 20 20.
it's hard to know
exactly if you would have gone back okay
but let's let's let's
let's put that aside you said all right
screw i'm gonna find my own job and you
said you went
quote hard on linkedin what worked for
you and what didn't work for you
definitely so the advice i received uh
you know just networking with people
and i talked to someone he was like the
head of data science at the startup
and the first thing he said is like look
i don't have a job for you
but i have this key piece of advice go
find
10 companies that are just doing really
cool stuff
and just just send a cold email to the
decision maker
and say like this is my skill set that's
what i get for your company
regardless of that they have a job and
that's exactly what i did
i found 10 companies that are health
tech companies are really cool
and i just pitched myself really hard um
basically doing like an sdr role um for
myself
i'm just selling myself saying like hey
here's my skill set here's my resume
this is where i can align to your
company um let's schedule time to talk
so it wasn't even asking like hey
do you want to talk is like let's
schedule time to talk um one of those
companies was
my first role was verona health um and
it was such a
it was they gave me my first break as a
data scientist i'm very thankful for
that
um and that's that was through linkedin
completely just doing emails on linkedin
and
um not waiting for a job application but
saying like
like just going after people that that
was great alignment
and they specifically said like oh we
don't have the job posting up we're
gonna put up next week
so wait let's talk that's
that's incredible um a cup
congratulations and that's that's such a
cool story
um a couple things i want to highlight
there or i want to ask you about
so you talk to some director guy he's
like hey i don't have a job
but send you know 10 cold emails to
companies you sound interested in
and one of them ended up giving you a
job what did you say in
in those emails and was there anything
special about this one that ended up
why do you think that one company went
with you
yeah definitely so if you give me i can
probably share my screen yeah
i had a post i made like a year ago if i
can try to find it where i
basically broke down the process of
doing that in mail would that be helpful
yeah for sure for sure yeah um yeah you
can share your screen
um while you're pulling it up because
everyone who's watching
if you're not posting content on
linkedin often start posting
content on linkedin but here's a word of
advice
put that content somewhere where it's
searchable because
if you want to try to find a post from a
year ago
on your linkedin it's a little bit
easier you want to find on someone
else's linkedin
gosh it is impossible linkedin if you're
listening
please make a searchable archive i wish
i had the plug for linkedin because
there's so many things i wish
for content creators that just don't
have yeah so there's actually there's a
plug-in
well it's a separate service called
shield analytics and they make
they make your archive searchable uh
awesome but it's like 30 bucks a month
so i
do not get it anymore i did for like two
months and i was like
too much um okay while you're pulling
that up and take your time
uh i actually it's interesting that you
know
i think cold emailing and cold messaging
is underrated
um because that's actually how i got my
first
engineering job um i was i was a
freshman in college
and i had zero experience in terms of
like science
or engineering or math i just had high
school
and i worked at a gym and i played a lot
of soccer that's like
that was my resume basically and
i really wanted to work in college and
for some reason i was like i need to be
a scientist or an engineer and so i cold
emailed 20 professors and i was like hey
let me let me work in your lab and i
think out of the 20 i think
three replied one was a no
one was a here's a position ironically a
data analysis position
i met with her she said i wasn't like
prepared i wasn't ready
which i would love to go back to her now
and be like am i ready now
but she was right like a contract
she was like do you know how to program
i was like not really so
uh that was that was not good and then
the third one was just a random
metallurgical engineer professor and he
gave me a chance to work on paid for
three months and
basically those three months i owe the
rest of my career to because it all
built on top of each other so
cold emails underrated there you go yeah
uh so i found the post real quick sweets
yeah go ahead share screen let's see
awesome can you see my screen yep so
uh quick context so at my job around the
health i was unfortunately laid off in
the middle of a pandemic from this role
which is really what ended up being one
of the best things ever so what i did
think about linkedin content i created a
post called the layoff hustle
where every single day i was gonna
document how it from day one from being
laid off to me getting my
my job which is oh that's cool
so and i can go i can go specifically
into that strategy afterwards but i
wanted us to highlight one of these
posts that i created
um so you can see like the layout hustle
but um you know
if you've been laid off you have to
master the art of the email so here's my
template
so i say hello name of contact i'm
reaching out to my interest
in this position of the company and i
specifically highlight
key points that i've shown that i've
done my research um
of what's special about them and aligns
my certain skills so with my passions
here
i give a quick background about myself
that aligns with the world so i receive
my education
whatever background that's specialized
in this i remember
keying back to what the job description
or what the the company's mission is
um again providing couple context of
basically two points
i truly believe would be a strong asset
to your company with the ability to and
i describe again connecting it how can i
drive value for that company
and here's the key point this is the
call to action right here is
i'm excited about the opportunity and
certain that i can provide value to your
team i'll be very interested in
scheduling an interview at your earliest
convenience
and to further learn about this position
and i attach my resume
you're hired you're hired
that no that's that's really good um
keep it up for a second keep it up for a
second
okay um for those
for those of you you know who are like
who who find this useful and i think if
you're looking for any job
or you want to transfer your career i
think you should uh and if you're
watching
look at these little alligator eater
brackets that he's talking about
this is a specific message to this
specific person
he he did his research you know mark
went
and figured out what was cool about this
company and how he could bring
value to that company he did not copy
and paste
the same generic crap to a hundred
different people
he chose ten people he was interested in
and made it
you know specific you know he wrote
almost a new email i mean the template
you know really helps
but those those customized sections are
so important
and that's what makes you know a good
application
from a bad application um
i you know i've been hiring a little bit
here and there
uh for my analytics firm and i get
these messages on linkedin all the time
and it is so copy paste
in fact one time someone asked to speak
with the hiring manager
and i'm like uh i'm a one-man show
i am the hiring manager and if you spent
five
seconds on linkedin you would figure
that out like
it's not like it looks like i run like a
corporation like
dude like you and um automatically i
would never consider that person because
they just
they just proved they have no attention
to detail right
if i if i can't trust you to send a good
email how can i trust you you know with
100 not hundreds of thousands tens of
thousands of dollars of projects
i wish hundreds of thousands of dollars
millions of dollars let's put the energy
out there
yeah i like that maybe maybe in the
future but
i am not making hundreds of thousands of
dollars
not hundreds maybe millions but no just
kidding
but yeah like the cold email you have
it's so effective but it has to be
specific
otherwise it is a it is spam otherwise
in my opinion yeah
and the key thing too i want to
highlight is that you need to find the
decision maker
um hiring is super hard uh we're
currently hiring for my team at
humu and we're doing it for for a couple
months now
anyone who wants to be hired at humu you
know senior role it's super fun it's one
of the best jobs i've ever had
um and my manager is awesome so you get
to work with the awesome manager
um quick flight homeroom.com i love this
um but uh you need to find a decision
maker because
if you you're basically spoon feeding
them key
kind of sound bites that they can take
back to their team to advocate for you
and so if you make their job of hiring
easier
you're already in a good light you're
already winning um
because you've already described like
what's the pain point how you drive that
value
you've already sourced yourself for them
and now all they need to do is just
repeat what you said to them
to the other hiring people and this
makes their job significantly easier
so um who who who have you found to be
like the person like who's the best
person
to find on linkedin right because you
could like search by role is it the
hiring manager or is it like a team lead
or
yeah so again you you have to to do your
research
so my my strategy is like i like
startups so this may be different for
other types of companies
but i'll go on crunchbase which is like
a startup website and i'll find
names of startups um and then especially
they have like
news about like they just close around
or something like that yeah so they're
probably
hiring a lot um or they're a certain
size they've been around for it for a
little bit
um and then i essentially try to find
either
the if it's a very small startup it
should be like a ceo
ceo very small so like the amy smith's
of the internet of the data world right
um and they're they're i imagine very
stressed because you have so much on
your plate so again if you can just like
fill their need they're like great let's
talk like i don't have to look for
someone
you already showed up right um if it's a
little bit larger
maybe there's a technical um a technical
recruiter
or just a recruiter in general um making
sure it's the right
the right fit uh for that so they'll
work with the hiring manager
and then the next step is just maybe
finding the the data science manager the
data team manager
and reaching out directly to them and
here's the thing like
you'll get a lot of no's and that's okay
it's just you need to get the one yes
and um i actually have a specific
strategy i can go into of like how i
make that happen and how you can like
systematize this whole process
um which would you want me to yeah i
would be useful for this
yeah yeah so i showed you like the
layoff hustle
um i did something wild so middle of the
pandemic i was laid off
and so and my wife's made so again my
wife's still not working at this time so
it's like i need to make this work um
and she always believes in me i i said
i'm gonna do something wild
i'm not gonna send a single job
application um
to get hired uh and
essentially what i do is i'm going to
create a sales funnel to drive myself
into getting a job
and so i believe like the ada method so
it's awareness
interest desire and action and so i
built a sales funnel
for my job search via linkedin and so
instead of sending an application i made
one piece of content that was super
engaging
and drove value for someone to build
awareness of my brand and being aware
that i'm looking for a job
and so through that i just put out a
piece of content with a call of action
um i know that was laid off and that i
was currently searching
and so people in my network start
sending leads hiring managers came in my
email and so by building that awareness
um i built interest people went into my
in mail
and so that was that interest step and
so then i described the value i can
bring
like hey here's my skill set this is
what you're currently working on
let's discuss that would turn into the
interview steps or desire can i
communicate my needs
to this hiring panel that i have the
skill set that solves a problem
finally action the negotiation step of
like signing a contract of doing that
and so
if you switch from being like i'm an
employee to i'm a business of one
selling my services to potential
employers
it allows you to take more action and so
what i really liked about this breakdown
was
it gives me leverage to pull on so maybe
i'm getting a lot of leads but i'm not
getting past the interview step
that informs me that i can keep up my
process but i need to focus my time on
building my interview skills
or maybe i'm getting to like the
negotiation stage and i'm not be able to
communicate the value i can bring to get
actual contract i want
for for employment right and so maybe i
need to work on better refining
what my ask is and so by using those
levers
it just becomes a numbers game um
because i have this funnel i know what
what my percentage of turnover is for
each of my turnover like
uh to get to the next level and so that
just means like
if i want a offer i need to send in like
100
emails or make 100 posts and i know i
can get this offer
that's that's crazy so and
very cool and very exciting about who
came into my email
um and you know one of my friends
from my old job connected me and that's
how we talked so i didn't send a single
application for that that job man i had
interviews at multiple companies
yeah that's that's always better when
you have people coming to you
than you going to the companies it's
always you're like
i'm going to make up the stat but you're
like 20 times more likely
to get hired that's what it feels like
anyways it feels like it feels like it
yeah so
but hold on go back to this this sales
funnel thing
you use your linkedin is that what
you're saying yep i use my linkedin so
you create really
with my post i was gonna post every
single day with the goal of driving
to give some at least one person value
so
it was really like creating content
about
how to best um get a job or how to how
to do this data skill
so like really submitting myself and
being able to exhibit that hey i'm able
to communicate these concepts
i'm able to put myself out there um and
then also draw people in
and so it was a risky move but i was on
linkedin for a while i had a pretty wide
network but that was my first step
of actually being active on linkedin
heavy from like from a creator sample
interesting yeah i i for some reason
even putting posts out to the
universe um i was looking for a job
about a year ago
um i knew i was gonna leave exxon i was
still figuring out what i was gonna do
and i just turned on like i'm open to
recruiters um
and i i could not tell you
i probably got two to three recruiters
in my inbox a day
and i don't think i'm anything special
it's just i post it on linkedin every
day you know yeah
and and i think i don't know if that
just like affects the algorithm or
i don't know what it is linkedin's like
oh this person's using linkedin
so we give back to them via you know
recruiters i
don't know i have no idea you you build
that awareness and here's the thing like
i use linkedin posts for me
but there's another way to build
awareness is through those emails
so doing those target emails basically
your
sdr and sales and you're essentially
sending out cold calls to drive
people into that funnel so did you have
linkedin premium for a couple months
then
to uh yeah i did that i did the the the
free
free trial basically guys if you didn't
know this already
if you want to try out linkedin premium
you can get a free trial i think it's a
30 days or something like that sometimes
i do specials
um but then then you can cancel after 30
days
and then when when you hit cancel
they're like oh we'll give you one more
free month
at least that's how it usually is so you
get two two free months of linkedin
and then you can cancel it then and then
like wait a month and they'll send you
some in
like email like hey we miss you on
premium do you want a free month
like you can you can finagle your way
into it
yeah but yeah i just using that funnel
and the key thing is
how can you build awareness either
through organic reach through your own
posts
or targeted reach through um
you know finding finding leads that you
think you can capture and put through
your funnel
yeah anyone who's listening to this this
is gold try this if you're looking for a
job
not enough people try it what people try
to do
is barely fill out their linkedin
profile have very little information
and then go to the quick apply button
and quick apply as many jobs as they can
do this instead you'll lead to happier
jobs and a faster turnaround
i think worked out for mark right you're
living proof of it
work that worked out for me but uh i
would love to see anyone try and maybe
augment it and like share on linkedin
yourself what you tried and what
you what you changed what's working for
you i love it so if you're listening try
it
and then and then tell us how it went
tag me and mark we want to hear
um that's sweet i love thank you for
sharing that mark that's very creative
very cool um we're we're at 50 minutes
we've been talking time flies and we're
having fun
i want to respect your time um so i just
we
one of my last questions was role of
linkedin in your life i think you just
summarized it pretty well
um we'll skip this one the last thing i
want to talk about
uh with you is your dog but but before
we get to your dog
we'll end it on a data question here um
gabrielle pasca
is here and asks us this question do you
think that potential employees in the
future
will be providing specific service-based
solutions
instead of a generic nine-to-five job
job
that's a really hard question to be
honest i
that's that's more so i feel like that's
less of a data question more like a
market trends question of like what does
the future work look like especially
after pandemic
um and to be honest i don't have the
answer for
that but what i can say is that you know
you can make anything possible if you if
you drive
hustle so like you know some people may
really love the nine to five job
and that's what they go for right other
people may be like i want more
flexibility
and you're gonna just have to have to
take the risk and the creativity
to create that reality for yourself so
maybe you start like an llc
and you you do consulting on the side um
i mean avery i think you're better
equipped to answer this question
i was gonna say that sounds like me um
no i think
i think what you said is exactly right i
think freelancing will be a bigger thing
in the future um i i think like just
with the gig economy
like uber and uh i don't know postmates
and airbnb
i think we are getting to more
individual levels of stuff
so yeah maybe in the future like i'm
really good at cleaning up data and
that's my job and
you know companies don't have a data
scientist who does everything
they use 12 data scientists who
specialize at one given thing
that could definitely be the future but
i don't see it happening until
there's automated cars so after after
after self-driving cars that that could
be next
um but until then i think the
the balance where it is right now is is
probably where it will stay
although i do think more people will
continue to freelance i think that will
continue to grow
but not at some crazy like
futuristic rate quite yet and and like
you said
there's there's benefits to both you
know um
both have a lot of benefits including
nine to five literally has
more benefits like literally the the
benefits part of it you know so
um okay
uh okay anything else data dad if not i
want to talk about your dog
i love my dog so much okay i did a
recent post his name's albus
he's a standard poodle and like i said
my wife had
uh health issues he's trained to be a
service dog for my wife
so no one's very special for us
not only is he a loving member of our
family he has an important job of
keeping my wife safe uh and
giving her independence and so like he
just means the world to me because he
helps my wife
he helps me and also he's just super fun
and cute and loving
that's that's awesome man i i knew his
name was albus
because that's a dope name harry potter
if anyone shout out to my wife my wife's
a huge harry potter fan so i didn't have
a choice to name the dog
it's a good name you didn't have to it's
a great name i was like all right that
sounds cool
yeah uh okay standard poodle i have
i have a standard golden doodle so i was
wondering if you had a golden doodle but
it's a poodle
how much does albus weigh he's like 50
pounds
oh he looks bigger in the picture 50
maybe 60 pounds yeah i
he he's he's still pretty big but uh he
uh
but yeah he's only a year and a half old
oh year and a half that was my next
question is is age
um peach my dog just turned two
yesterday
but she weighs like she weighs like 80
pounds like she's
big yeah she's she's a big girl i was
i was curious i was like that looks that
looks like you peach's cousin or
something like that but there you go
albus the poodle he's a little chicken
nugget
that's that's awesome man dogs are dogs
are awesome
and i'm glad that it helps also like
he's actually taught me a lot too for my
data career
i saw that uh because like i have to
train him
uh training good behaviors and like dogs
will tell you when you're not training
them
oh yeah they'll stop listening even
though they know it because you have to
be consistent all the time
and that's really served as a lesson
like for my career if i want really want
to see things change i need to be
consistent
yeah even in your uh even in what you do
right like if you have a model
machine learning model and you don't
retrain it
it eventually stops working that's about
where that's about where peach is right
now
she was she's she's uh she's actually
going to be
well hopefully she's getting she's
training to be a therapy dog
oh awesome yeah so to go like to
hospitals and stuff
um she was like on the path and then we
moved
and like it's just been really hard to
find the time to like
go out and like train with her and stuff
like that just because
moving and setting things up so but now
like she
is i definitely have noticed her we're
having like
model uh what's it called
yeah like she is not listening the way
she used to so it's time to
tear it down and retrain and and get out
the thing for me is we took him to the
beach and took him off leash because it
was an off-leash beach
and he just thought oh i can run around
now and so now it's been working on
months for getting recall back
so dogs are fine but then they can be
fun
yeah man they can be tough on that
recall you gotta you gotta get some
cheese or something like that
yeah he goes crazy for cheese yeah
that's my secret is whenever peach is
like being really bad
oh i have cheese and then she's right
there that's funny he actually knows the
sound of the cheese wrapper being
yeah if i pull anything out of the
fridge
no he won't come brushing but the cheese
stick he knows the sound
if i touch not even like the not even
like open it if i touch
it peach is like that's a cheese stick i
know it give it to me right now
that that's funny man well mark thank
you so much thank you for your insights
loved hearing your story um i hope
everyone here
i know gabrielle just said thank you for
the awesome insights
i i second gabrielle like what an
amazing story you have and just to hear
you know about your your tips for the
layoff hustle i need to go back and
check out the hashtag
um and and look at those more
more closely but what what awesome uh
tips for linkedin and finding jobs
uh thank you man really appreciate you
having you on the show yeah no thank you
for having me this is a blast yeah
we'll do it again sometime so everyone
if you haven't connected with mark go
ahead and connect with mark
his link should be at least in the
linkedin
uh description also it'll be in the show
notes in the podcast
and hey let's throw that let's throw the
job the the job link on there too i know
someone asked earlier
who asked earlier uh zade said link
please so let's throw that and i'll
throw that in the show notes
i think it's calm slash careers right
now i can send
sweet why not right yeah
all right man well take care thank you
everyone for listening and i hope you
guys have an awesome friday
see ya bye

Title: How To Freelance in Data Science

Description: Day 1 of Daily Ask Avery! We are going to chat about freelancing! I'll be going live every day until the launch of Data Career Jumpstart on 8/18!

Video Transcript:
hey everyone welcome back to the ask
avery show
this is day one of something like 35
i think or 36 of daily ask avery shows
in a row
we'll be doing 15 minute sessions just
at random times of the day
i sent out a link yesterday on instagram
and on linkedin
to sign up for those spots and they are
already filled for all of the days
so if you missed out don't worry we'll
figure out some other time
but i'm excited to have my first guest
here for the ask avery show daily
and we got jack jack what's up how you
doing
hey i'm doing great awesome
where where are you from jack i'm from
dallas texas
oh i don't think i realized that okay
you're in texas
um okay and tell us give us a little
background about
who you are i think you're studying
something in college is that right
yes um i i attended a data science
bootcamp last year
i'm studying computer science i'm
getting a certificate in college right
now
and i also want to get my
associates in business so
that can help me get a data science job
sweet so if i understood you right there
you have
a data science bootcamp certificate
right
and you're getting a computer science
certificate right now is that right
yes okay great and but you don't have a
college degree
i do not hey that's awesome
um i i like that i actually think that's
perfectly fine
and uh i think you're gonna succeed um
okay so i guess tell me a little bit
about how your
your boot camp went i guess what boot
camp did you go with
how did you find the experience um and i
yeah let's start there how was the boot
camp
the boot camp was great i went to smu
with trinity education
um i did not actually graduate but i
i participated in most of the boot camp
it was pretty hard
um lots of homework i learned a lot
though
[Music]
okay that that makes sense um
how long was the the boot camp i guess
it was six months it was from last march
to september
okay six months boot camp okay and so
now
you're done with the boot camp you're
still studying a little bit but tell me
a little bit
uh i guess what you're doing right now
and what you're hoping to do
right now i'm trying to get into
freelance data science on upwork
i've sent some proposals to lots of
people
nobody will accept me
i'm what i'm looking forward to is
getting some freelance work so i can put
that on my resume and get a freelance a
full-time data science job after that
okay yeah that makes a lot of sense i
think that's really smart right
it's like okay let's start with some
freelance projects get some real world
experience under our belt
and uh and then we can maybe get get a
full-time
job um okay so you want to talk i guess
you want to talk more about
getting freelance jobs right now or
getting a full-time job your choice
which one
freelance okay sweet so you've been
trying
on upwork to get a couple jobs um
upwork is a great place that's where i
started well not where i started but i
still even get some of my clients
from from up work so it's a great place
to be
um i guess so far you've been applying
to jobs
not having a ton of success um but you
know trying to
trying to get those first few gigs um do
you want to open up your
upwork profile maybe we could look at it
together yeah
okay let's do that
here you go can you see it yep okay
um i've got one project in my portfolio
that was the only thing i could find
from my boot camp
okay let's start there
um you should have like five projects
in that portfolio right there um even if
they're
even if they're just really small it's
going to help so much
just to have like five projects um
inside of that portfolio just because go
ahead go ahead and click on that
project real fast let's take a look at
it
i'll let you uh kind of walk through it
here
i've got my erd diagram from the
sql from the database and here's a link
to the
repository on github
so we've got our write up right here we
did extract
transform and load
our project was on triathlon we studied
um senior triathletes from
from the usa and
and okay scroll scroll down for me yeah
keep scrolling let's take a look at it
you have some data tables there i see
some good
write-ups keep scrolling keep scrolling
like it to the bottom here let's take a
look more data frames
i guess it makes sense you're doing etl
extract load and transform right okay
here's a little graph from that um
and keep going go all the way to the
bottom now okay
cool so with that i think i think that's
a
a great start right that's a great place
to have a project on your portfolio
um i guess what type of jobs have you
applied to so far
on
mostly data scraping and some data
analysis
okay so data scraping so that's like web
scraping right
um and data analysis
let me ask you this do you feel like
that etl
project accurately displays that you can
web scrape and you can do data analysis
what are your thoughts there
yeah i think it does show that i can do
web scraping
okay because you web scraped that data
there is that is that right
okay cool um okay well that's good um
maybe let's let's bring it back up hold
on maybe we need to
change the name go back to the your your
upwork portfolio or your upwork profile
um let's see um how do i make this
bigger hold on
i don't feel like that picture does your
work justice
maybe we can create a new picture where
like you kind of explain
more because you got to think who you
got to think jack
who is on upwork you know who is hiring
on upwork
it's business people right it's people
who have small businesses it's people
it's like managers and and people who
are more
like team oriented and more
goal-oriented
um it's not neces i mean of course there
are technical people
on upwork i'm on upwork and i hire
people and upwork occasionally
um so hey maybe you can work for me
sometime um we could definitely make
that happen
um but you got to think these are
business people and so you want to cater
to the business person as much as you
can
so that's why um i think having a
portfolio on network is really good
i think having multiple projects would
be good um we got to be able to find a
couple more things from your boot camp
or spend some time
on your own doing some more projects so
that you can add those to your portfolio
you want at least three maybe
maybe one strictly on web scraping and
one maybe strictly on data analysis
just so you can highlight those a little
bit more the other thing is
you'll want to um that
that write-up you just had you know you
know how it's in github
personally once again you got to
remember you got to think what if i
am on um what if i am
on what's it called what if i'm on
upwork and i'm hiring
okay i click on that link from your
portfolio and it takes me
to your github which is good but if i
was more business-minded let's say i
didn't know how to code i'm just i'm
just a ceo of a small business
i don't want to go through github i want
to see it like on an actual website i
want to see that write-up you had
actually
so i'd almost switch the link to that
write-up because i think that's more
important than the actual code to be
honest
unless you get someone technical on on
upwork but most the time they're more
business oriented
they're less technical oriented so you
want to make it go straight to something
that has a business impact
we don't care so much about the code we
care about the value that you're
bringing
so what value did you bring in that
project and i'm sure it's probably
at the bottom there i just i just didn't
have a chance to read it all but that's
the thing you want to highlight does
that make sense
but you don't think i should have both
on there
i i do think you should have both on
there but i think you're
i think by going to github directly
you're losing a lot of people you're
losing a lot of business people
so you need to do is you need to go
create a portfolio
on a website you can do it for free you
could do you could do it here a little
bit more
i always forget how upworks portfolio
section works but actually add a little
bit more text a little bit more pictures
that like describes the project a little
bit more or you need to go build a
website you can build it for free
on like squarespace or wix and actually
give me as a business person some
context
why did you do this project what value
did it bring what tools did you use
i don't necessarily care about the code
that you that you
wrote to come to the results i care more
about the results
and you're just losing a little bit uh
you're losing me as a business as an
entrepreneur who doesn't have time to go
click through the links
you need to have the link right there
boom shows value
and then if they want to get into the
code they can so you're right you
definitely do need both
but i would suggest if you're only going
to do one to do the value part and then
have the code secondarily does that make
sense
also what photo do you think would be
appropriate here
hmm what photo do i think would be
appropriate here
um i would have to know more about the
project um
because also this this sounds more like
i mean this doesn't sound like a huge
like a lot of analysis right and that of
the analysis part of projects is a lot
where a lot of the value is
the data engineering the the extracting
the loading the transform
is often kind of like the boring part
it's the necessary
it's necessary to set up your data in a
way so it's all ready so you can get
meeting out of it but it's not like the
fun part of it you know it's not like
the meaning part of it
so you might you might just add to this
project you might just take the data
that you
you know you you cleaned and you created
and you might make a dashboard out of it
just like a simple dashboard
or something and have that be a separate
project you know
triathlon dashboard and that's probably
going to be a little bit more catchy
um but also i think one good thing to do
here
if you're if you're just going to have
it be an etl project is
write this diagram but do it like in
powerpoint
with business words right so business
people don't necessarily care about your
joining methods you know
was it a left outer join whatever they
don't care right
they just care i went to
www.triathlons.com
i scraped that's like one that's like
one box and then like an arrow to the
second box
i scraped 50 000 records of triathlons
that's a second box i put that into a
sql database that's the third box
the fourth base fourth box is like i
cleaned up spelling
or like i don't know whatever you did in
the project but just like spell it
less like a data engineer and more like
a like a business person because that's
that's the one thing about freelancing
is you're you're probably at least 40
a business person right you have to sell
yourself you have to market yourself
if you're working full-time for a
company it's just all technical but when
you're a freelancer you're also part
business person
and so that means you have to put on
your business person and talk and think
like a business person
and in this case i think you've done a
great job showing your skills you know
as someone like a web scrape and as a
data engineer and do the etl
but it's not necessarily translating to
a business person who's looking to
hiring you
thoughts thoughts
yeah i agree
um i think i should add some more
projects
maybe some more related to triathlon
yeah for sure you you can definitely
just take this project and maybe add a
little bit to it and you could do it in
really quick ways
um data visualization is super easy
it's like way easier than web scraping
and data analysis
you just like put stuff into a chart i
mean it's hard to do really well and
there's of course you can like master it
and get really good at it
just but just for starting you can make
a pretty cool graph that gets people's
attention and shows
value and shows an insight pretty
quickly by using python by using excel
even
i like a software online called flourish
flourish
dot studio super easy to make really
cool good looking graphs
so you could even take this project
right here and to be honest you could
probably divide it into three different
projects
you know you could say this is the web
scraping portion this is the
you know database loading portion and
the transform portion
and here's the analysis portion and
that's three projects instead of one
but just make sure that each one of
those projects has a lot of girth to it
you want to have pictures for everything
you did you want to have
explanations you want to have the value
the code
is obviously what counts but for
business people
it's like it's like for instance i know
you use instagram we follow each other
on instagram right do you care what the
code of instagram is
no you care about the value you care
about looking at people's photos you
look
looking at people's videos looking at
people's reels it's the value
that it brings that makes it valuable
right makes it interesting
the code behind it of course is
necessary but if instagram was just a
code and it didn't bring any value no
one would care
so that's why even in these projects
even though they're on instagram we need
to show value really quickly
and and make sure that a business person
understands the value
behind the code otherwise it's just code
and no one cares about just code
okay sweet well um i hope that helped i
i i'm glad to know that you're on upwork
now maybe maybe you and i can
can link up sometime um but
we can we can also i'd like to hear more
about how this goes in the future
let's let's i think you should
definitely add a project or two
um and we can we can go from there and
we can maybe have another call in the
future
and see how it's going with with more
projects i think
the the more projects you have on there
the better you'll be off
and the more those projects are like
spelled out for an idiot
like like like pretend you're talking to
like your grandma or your sister or like
your mom
and you're explaining this is what i did
right if you do that i think
people are going to be interested
because it sounds like an interesting
project
yeah so i should explain it as if they
know nothing about data
and programming
[Music]
you should explain it as if they know
nothing about about
triathlons even i mean just spell it out
this is why this is important this is
why i did this project
um and i definitely think as i mean make
this project as good as you can
um but but also you want to add more
projects in the future i definitely
think to be competitive on upwork
because think about it someone's
someone's reaching out on a limb
going some random stranger on the
internet and giving them money
you know they want to be sure that you
can do
what you say you can and especially
because you don't have a degree you
don't have necessarily
even a certificate right now right which
is which is not a big deal
but those two things usually
historically are the evidence that you
can do what you say you can
and since you don't have those you have
to lean so heavily
on your portfolio and so you want that
portfolio to really pop
and be be really awesome but i think
you're well on your way jack
i'm i'm proud of you for being on upwork
that's how i got started on on
freelancing kind of
it's a big portion of how i started my
business so man i'm so excited for your
future
i think good things are coming your way
brother
thank you so much for the help i really
appreciate it
yeah of course man i've got a jet it's
my mom's birthday we're going to a
little birthday dinner
um but as always if you haven't anything
you can contact me
on linkedin or instagram so appreciate
it jack we'll see you later man
all right have a great day you too
all right everyone that was awesome
talked to jack about freelancing and how
to improve
his upwork profile i hope you guys
enjoyed it and took some value
i wanted to say hello to muhammad and
natish here who are watching
and yes it is all about creating value
and it is all about the results
coding for coding's sake is boring we
like coding
for results and people don't necessarily
see the results right away
so this was the askgaryvee show part one
day
one of a couple i don't know 30 days in
a row till data crew jump start launches
hope you guys enjoyed it i'll be back on
tomorrow have a good night everyone
happy birthday mom if you're listening

Title: What is Data Engineering with Andreas Kretz

Description: Come listen to "The Plumber of Data Science" talk about his data journey. Andreas will talk about what data engineering is, and why (in his opinion), it's better than data science. We'll also talk about Andreas's coaching platform and courses.

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hey everyone how's it going welcome back
to the data career podcast
i'm super excited for today's guest we
have an
excellent guest uh andreas kretz welcome
to the data career podcast
hi thanks so
so glad to to have you here um for those
who don't know
who andreas is definitely figure out who
andreas
is you can find him on linkedin by
searching his name or you can find him
on youtube as well
uh he is the plumber of data science um
he's been a linkedin top voice
in data in 2018 and 2019.
um he recently just went full time with
learn data engineering which is
basically in my opinion the best place
to learn
how to be a data engineer so you can
find that at learndataengineering.com
and before that he worked for i don't
even know how to say this properly it's
it's some
looks kind of germany bosch rex roth is
that how you say it
yeah yeah sure sure yeah
and you were there for almost 10 years
right yeah
that's good and and you did all sorts of
big data data engineering problems and
leadership there
and he's one of the best people to
follow for for data engineering and data
in general so
super excited to have andreas on the
podcast with us so thanks for joining us
appreciate it
um i did want to talk about you know
what there's so many words in the data
field in the data industry right
there's data analyst there's big data
there's a.i um and then of course
there's data science and data
engineering
um for those who maybe aren't as
familiar could you maybe explain
um what the difference is and also
before before we get going i should say
hello to everyone watching live we do
have
dr tariq here how you doing
uh we have marie good morning um
forever for everyone else who's watching
feel free to ask any questions in the
comments
and we we might we might take some of
them for andreas but
but anyway sorry let's go back what's
difference between data engineering and
data science for you
yeah generally um i think
very often you hear data science and
you have this this umbrella where um
actually there are multiple jobs in data
science
and engineering is it's like a bit of a
part of this
but generally you have to think of
engineering
as is has something to do with actually
building the pipelines with working with
the data
getting data in feeding data into a
storage making it available for the
actual data scientists or for the
analysts
and the data scientists are the ones who
actually use the data and to
um yeah do their analytics on do machine
learning on
and actually this the data engineer is
sits below there
and has has the platform in hand who
actually automates everything
and manages the data there is a very
general uh
distinction that works usually very very
good you see this all the time
you have the scientist who's working on
doing analytics and you have the
engineers who are making sure
that everything runs good and data is
clean and so on
yeah so you kind of uh you make sure
that the trains the data trains run on
time and where they're supposed to then
uh for the data scientists and nothing
nothing nothing
quits quits in between and nobody
nobody knows it and stuff like that yeah
and nobody knows it okay so if it does
quit just make sure nobody
[Laughter]
i love that that that's awesome um
and so i guess uh i'm a data scientist
right you're a data engineer
um convince me as a data scientist
why why should i be a data engineer or
why is why is data engineering
maybe it's not better than data science
maybe it's just different but
i'm going to ask you anyways why is why
did you choose data engineering over
data science
well i'm i'm i'm i would say i'm an
engineer
i'm coming from the engineering side
i've been a software developer
and i always like try to figure out how
to
how to build stuff and like
make a mix of work like
build an end-to-end thing where you you
get something in and you solve a problem
and then uh yeah with that that all with
the with
the standard it stuff that because i'm
coming from a traditional it development
like
where you had where you're working with
databases and websites and
apis and so on and so for me
i always went towards the actual
engineering side
where i can work with the data where i
can figure out the schemas of databases
and actually how to process the data and
so on
whereas the data scientist as i said
before does a lot of
analytics and i tried it i was looking
into that but i
like i i didn't get over a
over a course from andrew eng on on on
coursera or something where no no that's
that's forget about it
that's not my thing and so i
actually went with engineering and
that's that's the thing so for
for the scientist if you're happy as a
scientist
stay a scientist be good as a data
scientist and if you're happy as an
engineer
be good as an engineer i i don't think
there's a
this transition is absolutely needed
what
happens very often is that you
you're in the data scientist role and i
see that
when i do coaching i have very often
have data scientists there
who are actually getting data engineer
coaching for me
because they're in a situation where
they are working on a
on a project on a platform they are
basically the
analytics is done and they they have had
their
csv files where they where they're
building the models and they're
they're training the models they're
testing everything and then
they get to the point like there are no
engineers
but now i need to build something now i
need to
to show it to someone not just like a
one-off thing but like build a minimum
viable product that or
even a proof of concept like where i say
okay here look we have a few servers and
here's the pipeline that everything
flows and
and very often the scientists in this
case is
doesn't have the knowledge to do that so
it's good
to to get some some engineering
knowledge to actually know okay
how could i build something when do i
use the api
what is the stream and the batch
pipeline
understand the difference between a
relational and a nosql database
like this stuff um is very important for
a
scientist that wants to build a bit of a
bit
yeah and then later usually later later
then they're coming the engineers once
everything is rolling
and then you try to make it better
yeah i i think that makes a lot of sense
um
and i love what you you talked about
like well i had kind of the i.t
and the cs background already that you
know really helped me with with data
engineering
um i think that's probably true i think
and i don't have a ton of experience in
data engineering
like you said i've been a data scientist
who has needed to do data engineering
tasks
and i've talked to andreas about this
before i do them pretty poorly i'm not
great
at data engineering it is not my
strength i'm a good data scientist but
i'm a bad data engineer
but i think people that have maybe like
domain backgrounds like i'm i'm like uh
a chemical engineer that's my original
background right or
people who maybe have like an economist
degree
or maybe people who have i don't know
some sort of domain knowledge
that have done that have been doing
analyses and understand the domain i
think they probably end up
as good data scientists and i think
people maybe who are in i.t
or information systems or you know
cs computer engineering i think they end
up making
good data engineers and i mean you could
you could do either it's not like this
is a hard boundary
but i just think having that computer
and tech background
and like understanding how systems works
is so key for data engineering and i
think you just get a head start
if you if you've already been doing that
right versus a chemical engineer
we don't really ever touch you know
databases and the difference between
you know nosql and sql databases so
i think that's that's really interesting
that you said that
um but how much how much do you think a
data scientist
should be able to do in the data
engineering world
well it always depends on like uh what
what level are you are you going to work
on like
as i said if you're if you're still in
the early phase of a project and you
need to set some stuff
up i mean um
create maybe use something like
power bi understand how to build the
database behind it
where you store the data and then make
it accessible
and find a way to actually
feed in data through whatever an api or
do a
or like have a file
dropped somewhere and then some
automatic processing
behind it that takes the file and puts
it somewhere where you can then later
where you can apply your your models on
so i think i think it's um
what the what the scientist doesn't
really need is
deep knowledge of of the monitoring apps
like what what could you do to actually
like
make it make it nice make it a nice
monitoring
do a lot of performance um improvements
and so on
i think that's something what i think a
data scientist doesn't really need
it's it should data scientists should
work around
actually building something a rough
thing that works
and how to and that allows to apply the
actual
applies to allows to train the data
train the models
allow us to apply models and there are a
ton of
features like if you go on a cloud
platform you can do that
very very well very very simple simple
methods
maybe it's very very simple for for
andreas but i don't know if it's
it's like once you know once you know
where to look and that that's what i
mean
once you know where to look the actual
doing is fairly easy
but you need to you need to understand
okay how do
in general how do some tools work
how do i this what type of schema design
do i need i'm
thinking this i just has told you before
before we
went live like i was working this
morning on recording it
schema design course the actual the
actual
doing and planning before for that and
that is
which tool to use how do i design my
my schemas for my data so i understand
how to store it and how to query it
again
the actual this is more work than the
actual doing if you go on on aws
something set up set up a message queue
is fairly easy you can do that with a
few clicks
but you need to understand when do i
need to set up the message queue when
does it make sense how do i
how does the data look or should the
data look that is sent through
and these are the things that that you
that you need to understand
yeah that's that's so true because um
so like i said i have dabbled in data
engineering you know i've been on these
public cloud platforms like
you know google cloud platform or azure
or
aws and you're totally right that it's
less
diff like the tasks aren't difficult to
do
but knowing where to click and when to
click that is that is the key right
and i i think uh especially in these
cloud platforms
i'm sure they don't do it on purpose but
it almost feels like sometimes on
purpose
they're making it like very hard to find
like the one the one or two buttons you
need to press
like you have to like open up a panel
and then drop down a menu and then
oh there it is i'm sure i'm sure you
know where it is but i don't know some
sometimes it's
sometimes it's annoying yeah we had we
had things like where we
were in in the coaching we we solved the
problem and we worked
we were an hour we went through
everything
like and then it was just a simple like
a tick a box
needed to be ticked and i went over it i
didn't see it and then that was it and
then it worked
and then you you sit there like oh my
god
this took us forever just because
so this this is just completely normal
it's it's like when you have a bug in
your code
only it's like worse because it's a
check box right like it's something
that's
that feels a lot simpler that's true
that's funny
um and i guess how much on the flip side
here
how much did it oh wait no we asked this
we how much data science should a data
engineer know
yeah for i think for a for
engineer it's it's important to be able
to
talk to a scientist so understand how
does the actual the rough
process work on how
on on data science or on machine
learning what are they doing
and what are their needs so so think
about
they they want to do data they need to
do data exploration
what type of tools do they most likely
need there
why are they doing data exploration um
then you need to that yeah then you need
to understand like
um how does the data look what are they
looking for
are they looking for uh oh man
now i'm blanking here um
uh basically it does the data already
have examples
of it maybe somebody in the chat or or
avery you can help me with that how's
that called
and the the two you have clustering yeah
if you're supervised learning and if
you're doing unsupervised learning
so that an engineer needs understands
the differences you don't need to
actually be able to do it
but you need to understand so if a data
scientist comes to you and says here i
want to do
supervised learning and i need to have
these features here
this this this and this and i'm missing
the actual
the actual feature that indicates if
it's if it's right or wrong or
like then you then you then you
understand what you'll look for and how
to communicate with these people
okay so it's it's more of understanding
the
the use cases and what they need
available inside of the data
yeah yeah like and how to
yeah generally that's i think that that
fits very good
because if you if you if you don't
understand what the data scientist needs
then you have a problem like how can you
how can you support someone
because as an engineer your role is to
support your role is to okay
here and then i then if you need the
data like this then let's figure out a
way to actually store it
like this and that you with a good
performance can query it
ah you need to have your results
sent to an api and let's let's build
something around that
so that when once your model is running
the model can send the data
whatever to message you or we set up an
api for that
yeah yeah i think that makes sense um
at when i worked for so i've i've worked
for
a small company i worked for a company
called vapersense it had
like 15 people um and so you can imagine
we definitely do not have every role
there is and you need in a business so
we didn't necessarily have a designated
data engineer so that either fell on our
like software engineer or it fell on us
the data scientists
um and then at exxon there's there's
i never met one person with the title um
data engineer there was people that were
doing you know i mean
i i guess there was data architects and
that that falls inside of data
engineering
yeah it's a part yeah yeah i would say
it's yeah
it's a part um but the
the we didn't really have too many um
data engineers and sometimes that led
to a lot of problems where the and i
think this is also i think also data
engineering and data governance are
actually pretty related
i think data governance uh is kind of
like
the people that are making sure that the
data science and the data engineering
and the business are all on the same
page right um
but anyways we just didn't have too many
data engineers and i think that i think
i think that actually kind of
made our data science suffer quite a bit
have you seen that in
your career yeah it's generally that's
that's the that's the problem like and
that's why why engineering right now is
i wouldn't call it booming but
it it's it's getting somewhere i call it
booming
you know we call it booming yeah i think
so
because people realize as you said
you you can you can build something you
can do a
you can do some analytics but at some
point you need to automate it at some
point you need to make a reliable
product out of it and it's very very
dangerous to actually do this with
without a specialist without somebody
who has
who can architect something who can can
set it up
who can maintain it right
and so that's that's why that's why this
is coming right now
that's why that's why engineering is
more more needed because
a lot of companies like your 15 people
company
they are getting to that stage where
they have that set up now and now
they're running into problems
the stuff quits without anybody notices
or on the weekend stuff doesn't work
then who
takes care of everything right so this
stuff
where you need good engineering that is
that is important
i think that yeah you guys like
um just while you're talking i kind of
thought of this analogy
data scientists like let's say let's say
there's a cliff
you know and there's or like a canyon
maybe and there's there's two sides of
this cliff
and these scientists might make a bridge
you know an analysis that that gaps that
cliff right
but the bridge is kind of it's wooden
it's kind of janky it might have some
like steps missing
swings back and forth it's like maybe
barely working and what it did
engineer's job is to come in and make it
reliable
so you know instead of making it wood
maybe they make it out of steel or
something like that and
they make it a little less wobbly maybe
there's still some wobbles but
but like you don't notice the wobbles as
much that that kind of
i mean and that that kind of goes with
your you know your your uh
your mantra right of the plumber of data
science you guys are making
you you're making data science reliable
right yeah that's true that's true
like it's it's uh
it's the plumbing it if it's if it if
it's
done right then it's invisible if not
it's a huge mess and that is that is
what what you see all the time and your
you your process that you described
actually
is is exactly how it happens like you
have you have a small team you have the
scientist the scientist builds the
wooden bridge that's the end does the
analytics builds a simple and simple
thing around it a simple platform and
then at some point
and engineers need to come in and need
to actually take charge of it take
charge of the operations
take charge of making it better making
it more reliable
so that the scientists can actually then
go back and focus
on on the actual science again
right if of course if you have both
teams at the beginning
it's even better but let's face it very
often you don't have that
very often people start small and the
scientist needs to have some
some knowledge of engineering to build
that first bridge
yeah that that makes sense um
while i was at exxon well actually when
i was an intern there
i got put on a project and i loved this
project it was my favorite thing i ever
did at exxon mobil
and i ended up so i prototyped
everything
in python and it worked really great
um distributing it to other people was
was kind of hard
i should have i should have made it like
a container and deployed it as a web
application
but as an intern i didn't really know
how to how to do that quite yet
so anyways our it team ended up taking
it
and redesigning it in i think they were
using like.net basically
and putting it on azure putting it in
the cloud
and to be honest uh it didn't go very
far they ran into a lot of issues
um the the it team really struggled with
it
um and the person doing it i mean i
don't i don't blame him
um the technology we were using was was
kind of old and a little clunky
um but he had a
i think a software engineering degree
um and he was kind of acting as you know
a little bit as a data engineer
a little bit as a software engineer what
background is best
if i want to get into data engineering
generally i would say if you if you have
a general knowledge of computer designs
that is that is the
main thing like i'm coming from where
i'm coming from how i started is
i said that the traditional computer
science route
i always like computer networking as
well working at bosch
as an intern for while i studied
i was working in networking departments
to
set up routers and set up
networks and everything so i that is one
part and you
you need that knowledge of ip routing
and and so on i've been networking
a lot of times even if you're on the
cloud platforms that is something i
i that is dear to me i think you need
you need to you need generally these are
the three things that that you need you
need
computer networking because you see this
all the time you need
um relational databases you need to be
able to
to query data from from a relational
database with sql
you need to be able to to design a
simple sql database
a relational database and you need to
have some software development skills
you don't need to be the the best ever
but like these are these are the the
the tools the the things you you all the
time see
you know and without coding you can't do
stuff you can't do stuff because it's
not like
when a lot of people say like huh we
have these new platforms where you do
click
click and everything is done
it doesn't work that way
for very very simple stuff might
but like yeah so you need coding you
need to understand how to how to
work with data in databases and then
how can you yeah how can you set up a
few things like
let's see even if you're working with
docker you need to understand okay and
now i need to create a network and
you need to understand that the
containers need to
have need to be part of the network and
maybe you need to get in and need to
understand need to look up the
actual ip addresses within the
containers of stuff so you need to
understand how does that work
right and from there on i think then
then
that's that's the way to go so you yeah
do do you need a formal degree
yes and no okay
i think um if you're really good
or let's say let's say this way the
this you can learn everything on your
own
like there are so many good courses out
there if you have no idea about coding
you can you can do that
but actually study
studying that at a university
has a lot of different aspects that
that help you on your journey right so
um to to actually do some projects there
to
have the stress of of
learning for for actual tests and so on
like they they have a lot of knowledge
around there
where you might not might not even know
that you need to learn
so i think generally it makes sense to
to have a degree
um yeah but it's not it's not super
necessary if you have the
if you don't have a degree and have have
years of experience in working in these
topics
who who do you take somebody who has a
lot of experience or somebody is new and
has a degree
most likely the person who has
experience
okay let's take me for example let's say
i'm a chemical engineer
um i i have an undergrad in chemical
engineering
i know how to use python i know a little
bit of sql
um could i could i just could i just
take some courses on
learndataengineering.com
and figure figure out a decent amount of
it
yeah sure sure let's just the thing is
and and what i'm what i'm doing with the
academy
like people people are uh my focus is to
teaching you
and i do this with the academy i do this
with the coaching teaching you where to
look
there if you're looking for specific
courses on a
let's say a apache spark course i always
say there there are
there's a hundred percent twenty dollar
course on on udemy or something that is
way better than than what i do what i
have in the academy
but this these these single courses that
you see
everywhere they they they don't help you
because you learn this one tool
and you don't know how this how
everything works together how can you
actually build something
like how how like there are there are
multiple layers of a platform and you
need to understand that
and that is we and once you are on that
level
like you you you could go you could go
on on the academy
look about look through this stuff look
through like
how do document stories work and then
you can if you're interested in that
to to go the further then i would get a
course on that or a good book
where you actually have a 200 page book
and you go through it and you do some
exercises in there
then you know then you have a targeted
learning boom boom boom and you know
actually where to go
that's the biggest problem you you could
do it but you don't know where to start
yeah yeah the the road map is one of the
hardest parts of all
dated professions um especially because
i think it's so new
um that i mean okay it's not that new
but it's gotten
a lot more popular as of as of recently
and so i think there's a lot of
different avenues to learn
um and so we're still trying to figure
that out and i think the other part is
like you talked about earlier
is and this is true of a lot of tech
jobs is
your degree doesn't matter that much
it's it's your results it's your
experience you know
um it's can you prove that you're you're
valuable
um and in the past that's been a diploma
in a resume
um but i think now there's there's a big
transition between
okay well do you have experience do you
have
a way to show that you you know you've
done some projects in the past
i'm a big fan of having a portfolio and
doing projects
because i think that's how you show
people hey look
i can do something so um
what what advice would you would you
give to aspiring data professionals
you know maybe it's data science maybe
it's data engineering just someone who
wants to
have a career in data what would you say
to them
first of all i would i would try to to
pick
one thing to actually that that
understand
that you are interested in and get good
at it um
don't go out there and try to learn
everything pick a few things
um i'm not sure what you how you would
start that as a data scientist maybe
start with with some
supervised learning right and and some
some
irish data set but like
um start with the simple things and try
to
try to understand how how stuff fits
together
and from from there then try to improve
it step by step
so you're for engineering it would mean
you you build a simple platform like
with the relational database
and then at the next step you would go
and actually
how could you solve this with something
with a
with a document store how could you
solve that with that or a white column
store
what would that how would that change
everything what
what upsides and what downsides would
that have so you actually
start to start learning and and start
start
reading that for yourself but you need
the foundation and i think that first
for science is the same thing once you
have the foundation then you can
specialize in in certain areas
i like that because the both fields are
so big
right like there's so much stuff you can
learn inside of
a side of each and i always tell people
if
if they're just getting into data
science you know like you said get the
foundations you got to know
sql and then you need to know python and
or r
um it can be an or you can only have one
that's fine
um but then once you get that foundation
you can kind of specialize and i
i kind of joke with people and it's half
a joke half serious
that if if if you specialize on like
cloud computing and maybe like aws
inside of data science like you're going
to be a lot more valuable
than than i am right now you know like
you can surpass
me um as a data scientist even if you're
you're behind me
if you if you specialize at one thing
because i for whatever reason don't want
to specialize like i am never
specializing
and it's sometimes to my my downfall
because
it's impossible to know everything and
if someone got really good at one thing
they could probably make a lot of money
exactly and and that that fits together
with
what you said and you cannot learn
everything like
within when i do coaching i have
students who work on aws
i know my i know fairly good aws i i
i'm pretty good in this then i have
students who work
on azure or on gcp i'm not the
gcp or azure expert but once you once
you have knowledge of one you can see
how does that ah that thing is basically
the same thing just name
differently it works a bit different but
then you can actually
advise how to how to how to get there
right and so so that's
i struggle with this all the time like i
have students they are way better with
azure than i am
because i'm not i'm not specialized in
that i know
how it translates i know the the i know
how it works but i'm
like i don't have the hands-on
experience and you cannot have hands-on
experience with everything that's
that's impossible yeah but but like you
said you can figure it out
if you need to right like you can you
you know
enough about how it works in aws that
you understand the structure
you understand like the main concepts
you know where to look if you have
questions
and and that's the cool thing yeah it's
i started with hadoop i i'm like
i've been working for almost like these
like uh
maybe seven or eight years on hadoop
platforms
and once you know once i knew that and
once uh once i had
had like inside and how that every how
that works what are the tools
what to use them for then you look
around and you see the stuff
everywhere it's the same things they are
named differently
sometimes i i think like do they do they
have the
in the background exactly the same
systems but they just
differently and gave it a different
interface yeah
is that the same thing yeah
that that is a good point that a lot of
them look look pretty similar
um and and you're right they could just
be
the exact same thing in the background
and they just have different names and
maybe maybe the buttons are hidden
differently
that's that's how i see it i'm like
where is that stupid button i'm looking
all over for
uh okay that's that's awesome um
here's a question here from uh neat let
me
take it uh let's see so we need domain
knowledge to break into data science
not just using tool will help
i don't think i mean that's that's kind
of
what about data engineering do you need
you don't need domain experience like
you can work in any domain or any
industry right
with data engineering um
technically yes of course it is good to
to understand
how is the data being generated would
you need to
you need to have a knowledge because at
some point you need to do about data
validation
it comes in somewhere and you need to
validate it so you need to understand
actually
does that does that data make sense or
not but
not to a degree like a data scientist i
think where you have where you know
like i'm coming from the iot world like
with predictive maintenance where you
know the physical
yeah relationships between stuff that's
not like not
nothing for an engineer yeah exactly so
i think engineering you need less domain
experience
as a data scientist you don't
necessarily need
the domain experience but it can really
help you especially when you're breaking
in
um i gave this example uh with talking
to matt francis the other day
um he's a geologist worked in oil and
gas
but i'll give it again today um at exxon
and if you've listened to the podcast or
seen any of my posts
you guys may know that i am not the
my memories at exxon are not the most
fond it was it was it was a good
experience
um but i'm glad to be doing something
else but one of the best things that
exxon did is they actually had these
data science data analytics uh
crowdsourcing competitions
so they would put a problem that one
part of the business was experiencing
they'd give you data for it
and they say hey this is the problem
we're having here's the data that we
think could help
come up with a solution and they just
would crowdsource the solution and they
make it a competition
so you'd like have a team you'd work on
it in your free time and then you'd
you'd enter
you'd submit your like presentation or
your findings
um and they would kind of judge and and
maybe accept one of the solutions as as
a potential
solution and uh i have a chemical
engineering background
um but i i got into data science pretty
early um
so i would always enter these
competitions and
pretty much it was me versus all of the
actual
data scientists inside of the iit
department versus i was a data scientist
in like the in like the engineering
department
um and even though these data scientists
maybe were better data scientists than i
i was i had such an advantage because
they never knew like like one of the
most basic things is sulfur
in oil is bad and they never knew that
right they just
you don't get taught that uh as an i.t
professional
you know but as a chemical engineer
that's like that's like oh yeah sulfur's
bad
because it's you know it's poisonous it
doesn't help you in your car so you need
to remove it so it's bad
but they never got that so i mean didn't
necessarily
you know they were still able to ask
someone that
had domain knowledge and figure it out
but just having domain knowledge maybe
saves you one step
of having to ask someone and be a little
bit more intuitive
in how your your solutions like oh does
this solution make sense
you know because a lot of the times when
you're making a
model you're just kind of like oh the
data says that this is predictive
you know x is predictive of y but you're
right like you said there are first
principles
you know actual governing engineering
equations of physics
that can that can tell us oh yeah that
makes sense or that's kind of weird that
doesn't make sense so
it's i have the same experience like in
my old job we
were about um predictive maintenance of
of stuff like of machines like
just i i always try to
we in general we always try to try to
tell the management
listen the actual the actual platform
or the automation that is not that is
not the big thing
the big thing is or even the analytics
very often the analytics is is quite
simple but actually understand
why are you doing what you're doing with
the data
or what what does the data mean out of
the domain knowledge that is something
that
that a lot of people don't have and then
they they even though they might use the
same algorithms they they will not get
to the same results or good
results because they lack the the domain
knowledge
and even as i said if you're if you're a
scientist who has both
you can take a few steps and or skip a
few steps
and make it make it even faster yeah so
yeah
it's it's important it's important
especially when you're when you're
breaking in
um so if you don't have you know uh
a let's say a cs background or a
statistics background
um you you may not necessarily be super
qualified for data scientist
position or data engineering position
but if you can offer
hey i'm a data engineer maybe maybe you
have like for instance
a chemical engineering degree and you're
a data engineer for an oil company
or your data scientist for a
pharmaceutical company that helps you
break in more because
the domain knowledge is always valuable
on top of your technical skills
so it it it could be really important
for that first job
after the first job and you and you get
the rest of the technical
you know i.t side of things it may be
not as much
important but but it's it's for
engineering it's the same
like for instance when i with my
coaching students at the beginning
if they are in the position where they
want to become a data engineer
i'm trying to get them to a point where
they
where they are looking for certain
industries
yes if you're if you're looking at
e-commerce or if you're looking at the
iot or banking or whatever right so if
you have that knowledge
sorry if you have that knowledge
and if you have some practice in that
then it's easier to break in the same
the same industry again because people
understand ah
that this person already knows the work
with finance data
so we are working with finance data as
well
it most likely will not be very very
difficult for this person to start
yeah i love that too i love that i don't
know where i had heard that about your
coaching but um
maybe it was when we talked earlier if
if you're trying to work for facebook
solve you know study problems that
facebook
faces right and and then you have
something amazing to show
on your resume like i tackled this
project that you know is relevant to
facebook
um you can have an online project that's
on your online portfolio that says hey
look here's the data that
like here's my thought process um and
then when you're in the interview
and they you know maybe the the
interviewer is looking at you and
looking at your resume and they're like
what do i ask this person
and it's like oh here is this really
relevant thing that we do at facebook
i'm going to talk about that and that's
going to make you seem like a genius
it's like that's such a that's such a
good way of
preparing for an interview is like okay
this is
my end goal you know how what type of
things do they care about and how can i
focus
on those types of things so i like that
you do that
in in the academy um
before we move on but that works for as
you said that works for a scientist
as well as for an engineer yes the the
the the project that you would put on
your github and put in the resume would
be different
that a scientist would most likely focus
on predicting stuff
and the engineer would try to focus on
working with the data putting it
somewhere
and like i'm not sure we wouldn't
we would need to look into into that a
bit more but like
working with data warehouses or like
apis that from from apps where you
where you simulate apps or something
right yeah
it would be different but generally it
would be the same have something
that is relevant for this industry and
it wouldn't even it doesn't even
need to come to the point where the
interviewer asks you about the project
you can do that as well like when yeah
there are
there are coming questions and maybe you
don't know the answer but you could
answer like
well i did a project there
in my github or for fun and i had
the exact same or a similar problem and
there i solved it like this
and then you get the conversation going
but you need some
something in your portfolio to actually
start start with that
right so true you can bring it up that
that's a great point
um i i did want to tell you just a
little funny story
um uh i i haven't told you this i
haven't really told
that many people this um okay excited
yes you should be about a year ago
i knew i was gonna leave exxon um about
a year ago
um i just i wasn't too happy with my
role company culture wasn't what i was
looking for
and so i was i was you know i was open
to to
offers um and i ended up getting a
message
in my linkedin from a recruiter at
facebook
um and and for reference my first role
at exxon mobil
my title was optimization engineer
and basically i was a data scientist
that would make
models that would optimize the
refineries that we had at exxon mobil
so i was doing a lot of of
optimization type data science you know
lp linear programming
solving for a maximum um and this
facebook recruiter reached out to me and
i think i think it was because
i was active on linkedin in the data
science community
and i had on my resume optimization
engineer
because they had this role that was an
optimization engineer
um but it turns so anyways i talked to
this recruiter
um and i ended up getting pretty far up
the the interview process to like the
final interview with like
the the team manager um but about
halfway through
i figured out this optimization engineer
job
was really it was an optimization of
their cloud computers so they were like
trying to optimize
where different videos are stored around
the world and at what time they're there
and
all this stuff and that's like it was
very data engineering heavy
and as i've told you in the past i'm a
very bad data engineer
not very bad i won't go that low i'm not
a good data engineer
um and i realized that halfway through
like this
process and i was like oh but it's
facebook that's kind of exciting
but i'm like not qualified at all so
anyways i made it to the last round
uh basically this data engineer
process and then finally the tech lead
was like you don't know anything about
data engineering and i'm like yeah
that's that's pretty much true i don't
disagree with you at all
and i would be a bad data engineer but i
made it this far so
anyways i
i needed i guess i needed lean date
learn data engineering.com but for that
interview process yeah
i think in your case then the problem
was it wasn't clear
on what the what the actual goals were
in this
they they saw that optimization engineer
but they
they never really pointed out what
what exactly that means right and yeah
you were you were more thinking of like
a scientist they were more thinking of
an engineer
but it was never made clear that
what they were what they were thinking
of yeah
it was a fun experience i once i figured
out i was like ah
well i'm gonna just see how far i can go
and uh see how far i can fool and like i
like like you said like once you have a
job an industry picked out and then a
specific job
you can really hone down and try to
learn the details so i tried to learn as
much as i could
about like network engineering and cloud
computing
is in like a week as i could but anyways
the problem is if it's not fun for you
then it is the wrong thing
yeah that's that's also what i see a lot
like people
especially a few years ago where
everybody was talking about data
scientists and data scientists
and like peop everybody was trying to
get a data science become a data
scientist
and then a lot figured out oh
that's not that's not my thing like and
then oops
what to do now right so i think that
you need to you need to find out is it
is that even something i want to do
engineering or science for both roles
and so for you it wouldn't it wouldn't
have to make the most likely no
not sense to to take that engineer shop
because it's not fun
yeah that 100 you're you're really right
but it was it was it would have been
hard to turn down i think money-wise so
maybe it would have been miserable for a
year and then tried to transfer to a
data science job that was kind of my
thought i was like
maybe i can just fake being a data
engineer for one year and then i can
just switch to a data science
job inside of facebook but yeah you're
100 right you need to make sure
happiness over everything and like
that's
for me as well like i had a really
really good job at bosch and i was
was making good money uh but it didn't
make me happy
and yeah it even took me to a point
where my health was
was struggling it was or where i was
struggling with health
and so i need to do a change and
like look at me now i would have almost
said
like but it's like you need to do what
it would
if you like what's what's fun to you
for you yeah focus on that
we spend i think i think we spend
something like 90
000 hours of our life working
and it's like do you want to be
miserable during those 90 000
hours or would you like to be happy and
if it involves
you know if it involves going back to
school then i think you should do it you
know
if it involves an investment i think you
should do it if it
involves taking you know a pay cut i
think you should do it because
you only have one life you have 90 000
hours that you're going to spend
regardless you might as well be happy
during those 90 000 hours versus sad
right
miserable but but yeah
well i i don't want to be a ball
buzzkill but most likely you're not
going to be happy with this 90 000 hours
either way like
there are these you know how it is like
last week i was working on a
on a kafka course and like i was
struggling with the
no that was for mongodb for the mongodb
course that's coming out next week
i was i was struggling with setting up
the stupid docker container
oh that's right for i even made a live
stream about this because i
couldn't get it i was working like four
hours as i was sitting there
trying to get this stupid thing running
and got nowhere and
five hours of total frustration
and then i like so it
it's not it's either it's not always
like sunshine
but once once once you once you figure
it out it out then then
it's a pretty good feeling like yeah and
then back to zone
there's definitely highs and lows to any
position
you have i guess it's just a matter of
of
choosing your lows right what type of
lows would you like and i guess how
often are
those lows um yeah because like you know
you you're going to get through it
when i when i i when i struggled
i knew that i knew it's it's super dumb
and it shouldn't be that hard but i knew
if i
if i just spent more time then i'm going
to figure it out and everything will be
fine
there hasn't been a problem until now
that i never figured out
so you just need to
struggle through it and then be happy
that it works
i love that and and of course i mean
you would you rather have
be stuck on a line of code or like for
instance at exxon
i felt like the bureaucracy and the
management was just like
very handcuffing it's like they both are
hard right
they're both lows but it's like which
one would you rather
deal with and also you know
one thing i love about you know data
science and just data careers in general
is a lot of the time it's just you the
data and a computer
you know those are the three objects in
play
versus let's just say a chemical
engineer you have
you a hundred different processes
inside of a refinery oil a hundred
different people
inside of a refinery and it's like if
something goes wrong
you don't have control over everything
versus a lot of the times
i mean this isn't always true but a lot
of the times when it's just you
the data in a computer i mean there's
not a whole lot of people that you can
blame
you know other than that's true yeah i
mean
like i said as well yeah yeah and
obviously as you scale up like for
instance let's go to a big system like
facebook
there's hundreds of data sources and
there's hundreds of engineers and that
gets a little more complicated but
i think the principle still we've been
we've been talking recently about
about facebook um i don't even remember
with whom
one of my students or with somebody else
like we
and and they said i don't remember who
said it or who who was it
but like the the thing was with facebook
everything is already
like set they already they have this oh
yeah
right yep and there's it's not really
like there's a struggle and you you need
to
work out complex problems and like set
up
systems or or model like your pipelines
because most of the stuff is already
done and you're just there and
you're transforming from here to there
and like
so so so it's not it's not as
challenging as
starting with a star getting to a
startup and
the startup starts from from zero you
need to come up with an architecture and
so on and so on
so yeah yeah i don't know how i started
this but what that was
wasn't interesting no no you're 100 to
go with this
no you're 100 right though that often at
big companies
the work is maybe a little
less meaningful occasionally and you're
more this is how i felt at exxon i mean
i'm sure other places are different but
at exxon
i felt like a lot of the time and i
think this goes with exxon's culture so
i think tech companies are probably a
little bit different um
but a lot of the time i felt like i was
a monkey you know i'm just grinding
i'm just winding the music box like i'm
just doing what i'm told
because there's a lot of systems in
place and they don't they didn't
necessarily want to innovate as much as
i wanted to innovate
at smaller companies innovation is kind
of a necessity a lot of the time like
you said like you're starting from
scratch so you have to come up with
something
and that can be really fun and and
really rewarding yeah
yeah projects can also be also in bigger
companies projects can be fun
yeah when you when you start up when you
when you have it as a startup but once
i made this this experience once you get
into the machine
once you make this this step from ah
we're doing a startup and we're
we're very self-reliant and then you're
getting into the
actual processes of the company then the
frustration can start
because then there are challenges
there's there's stuff in place that you
cannot skip
there you need to whatever you need to
you need to work with
with the it department and they have
their processes and
they have they are telling you how to
set the
the your firewalls and what is allowed
and what is not allowed like
yeah you then you have to fight and then
you're in the
in the bureaucracy and so on so yeah
it's it's can also be challenging
but my thing is my thing is always the
startup thing i
i think i i'm like thinking about how to
how to solve problems
how how can we what could we build to
actually
set this set everything up and and
that is that is the most interesting
part of it
yeah it it is interesting how there's
different personalities that match that
better
there's like um for like big companies
like more like public companies
they have like growth ceos right so
people that are like
really growing the business and like
making it and innovating
and then they have you know what is it
called operational ceos and they're like
the people who are
maintaining and keeping everything where
it is and
i think i think that's true of you know
personalities you know people like you
and me
we might like to build things and i i
won't i won't bring your name into it
but i i'm not a great finisher you know
like i'm very good at like coming up
with ideas
and building it you know but sometimes i
get bored or i just get discouraged by
the bureaucracy and i think there's
probably
other people that have you know better
personalities to
to finish sometimes when i start
yeah but it it it's absolutely right i
i've been thinking about this
um this or i was thinking about this
earlier end of last year as well
like once you're once you pass the
the like the initial face there there
are these the builders the
the the conceptual workers the the
the architects and so on once you once
you
once you go through that most likely you
need somebody else
who actually takes it from there and
scales it and works with the with the
bureaucracy
and and everything so they're they're
i think it's it's exactly like you said
with mentalities there are different
mentalities like
the one below the the one who stu who's
working on the startup
who's who's trying to build something
doesn't care about the infrastructure
that is already there doesn't care about
uh
the rules of the of the company like
yeah the general rules of course but
like
doesn't care if this is right or this is
right from it
yeah like you're you're building
something you want to get somewhere you
want to
want to find a really good solution for
the problem and not
not be conformed to to the processes i
think that that's what i want to say
like you you're you're not looking for
conformity but at some point
you need to bring this into make this
everything conform to the to the
company's processes especially in
corporations
and these are different different
mindsets different people yeah
you need there and that's why i also
then like decided to take a step back
i'm like
i found myself a bit in the in the wrong
role
yeah um i and that's not which is not my
thing
yeah that super true and and both are
good
you know they're just there's different
personalities there are people who who
hate the stuff like the startup stuff
there's absolutely nothing they they
need order
they need processes and
we can't decide today this and tomorrow
this just because we found out something
new why didn't we think of this before
and like yep it's
it's completely normal and it's it's
nothing bad i think
for sure you have to know your role yeah
exactly exactly um
well this has been awesome conversation
i've really enjoyed it
um i've learned a lot about about data
engineering
um and i've learned a lot maybe even
about myself i'm like yeah i hate
managing stuff i just want to build
stuff so um hopefully everyone else
listening either live or in the podcast
also got a lot out of it i know
i did um where can we find you where can
we find to hear more of the plumber of
data science
you can find me on linkedin under
scratch
you can find me as you said in the
beginning on youtube i have a youtube
channel
with i don't know 300 videos or
something i recently bought myself a
gopro so i'm going to do a bit more
vlogging style in the next
few months so yeah i want to have
something that i that i can bring up and
quickly talk to so um that
i'm also on instagram andreas
that's it's very boring i always use the
same name
but like yeah okay let me there
maybe maybe if you give me the copy of
the audio i'm going to
also put it on my podcast yeah for sure
memories of data science podcast because
i haven't
haven't put stuff on there as well for
some time but
for sure yeah i'll give you the audio
and the video you can do whatever you
want with it for sure
um okay sweet yeah i um big fan of
andreas connect with him on linkedin
you can you can also check out uh the
academy learndataengineering.com
um i might need to take some classes
there especially if facebook ever
reaches out again you know what i'm
saying
figure some stuff out um just kidding
i'm very facebook if you're listening
i'm very happy with what i'm doing right
now
you can reach out later some other time
but right now i'm busy um
and uh yeah you can check them out on
youtube i just found them on instagram
i tagged you today um my story i think
so
i just found you um but yeah thank you
so much andreas thank you everyone else
who is listening
um hopefully if you have any more
questions about data engineering
uh you can reach out to me or andreas we
can talk about it more
um yep andreas thank you so much
appreciate you
stopping by thank you for having me here
um yeah bye-bye
bye

Title: Data Science Freelancing with Matthew Blasa

Description: In this episode of the Data Career Podcast, we interview Matthew Blasa, an experienced data science freelancer. Matthew will walk us through his story of how he got into data science and give his best tips for breaking into data science.

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
what is up everyone happy tuesday coming
from
slinden utah at 12 p.m eastern or 10 a.m
mountain time
this is the data career podcast i am
joined today
with matt blasa i'm super excited to
have him on the podcast
and uh get to hear from so matt welcome
to the podcast
hey nice to meet you i'm finally in
person
i know we've commented on each other's
linkedin and we've messaged each other
maybe a couple times on linkedin before
or commented obviously um but never
talks face-to-face
this is this is fun um for all those who
don't know matt
definitely go check him out on linkedin
connect with him on linkedin
his name is matthew blaza like i said
b-l-a-s-a
i'm gonna give a quick little bio he is
a data governance analyst which is a
pretty sweet title
uh pretty interesting right there for
brings home
but he's worked as a data science
freelancer and analyst for the last few
years
he's worked with a lot of technologies
including python sql
tableau go alteryx databricks
azure sas aws and azure which is like a
huge
tech stack to manage that's a lot to
know uh
he's an active contributor to the data
science community on linkedin
and yeah so i'm super excited to have
him on the show
and learn a little bit about his
background what advice he'd give to
people who want to break into the field
what advice he would want to give to
people who
want to do freelancing and all this
valuable knowledge that matt has so
let's go ahead and get into it matt i
would love to hear your story about how
you ended up in data because
yeah that's not necessarily the path
that you first chose in your career
right
no absolutely not um i mean after i
i mean for me it was i started out in
marketing so
um i was literally just doing higher
education marketing just
sending out stuff for international
students saying hey you know
come to my university it's great you
know you'll learn a lot
and then from there i mean just slowly
working into international programs
where it's just
trying to send out like targeted emails
you know google analytics that sort of
thing trying to retarget people from
east asia that sort of countries for
international students who wanted to
study in the united states
um i mean somewhere along the line it
just it was progressive i didn't have
this idea of hey i gotta go into data
science
it was it started out with okay why am i
like doing this marketing stuff okay and
then like wait these are interesting
metrics and then it came from there it's
like how do we calculate out these
metrics and then it
went to finally oh there might be a way
to predict this stuff or there might be
a way to use this data to
you know segment customers target
certain groups
and try and you know see like what kind
of customers that kind of uh
students that were pulling in so it
wasn't a straight path it's
i would say it's a very long and winding
path up this mountain and i'm not
nowhere near the top
i hope i'm not talk yeah well i think i
think if you're not there you're
definitely uh
on on your way that's for sure um
so okay you started in digital marketing
then right
yep and yes and that sounds kind of like
that was your path
into data science so how were you using
um data science in your digital
marketing was it mostly segmentation
or it was mostly segmentation um we were
doing a lot of work with like
analytics when i was working with some
of the companies in japan and china it
was more of um
hey you know these customers actually
click through on our emails or
hey you know these people look at this
person this person went through
from this path and they went all the way
through and their last click was from
this area
and we have them in the record here and
hey they bought this much
so my start out was okay let's identify
these customers
what did they buy like a so it market
basket analysis
what did they buy together what products
do they buy together let's retarget them
with at specialized ads or and i didn't
do a recommender system i wish i did
back then
but hey let's go to talk to the
developers and then start out with the
recommendation with these items and
that's how i got into them like wait
you can do a recommendation system of
this so it
working with those developers really
piqued my interest and got me into data
science
okay interesting um and i guess for
those who maybe
don't know too much about marketing or
even too much about about
you know analytics specifically in in
marketing uh can you define what
segmentation basically is
yeah of course segmentation means that
we're trying to look at customer trades
for example
um people who frequently buy
let's say cream or in my my end of
higher education
people certain people who target mba
programs or
master's programs for like sociology so
we would segment those out by the
people's interests
and also the responses on the surveys to
predict whether or not
they would be which which programs that
we're likely to go through
based off previous people who had gone
into the programs
and based off their grades so i wasn't
actually doing the other stuff there at
the time but i was watching these guys
doing it
and i'm like hey this is cool and then i
found out oh wait this is
math interesting because i have i have
an interest in that so i'm like okay
maybe i should pursue this okay so yeah
walk us walk us through that next step
then
what you saw these people doing these
you know complex analyses
and doing these recommendation systems
and doing the segmentation
and you were kind of watching from the
sideline maybe not the sideline you were
you were coming up with business reasons
and
and ask again to do this but what led
you to the point today where you could
do that analysis yourself what was that
next step
oh well the next step was i i kind of
well long story short i dropped out of
computer science program at portland
state university uh portland state
university portland community college
i was trying to get an aaa there because
i wanted to do programming didn't like
it
so i worked as a marketing person for a
while because that was easier
and then i mean i realized hey wait
these guys are actually solving problems
and then i said you know what maybe i
should go to school for math
and and figure it's because math is the
foundation of this maybe if i learn some
math
maybe i'll find my way into something
that that uses this
at the time i had no idea what math was
to be honest i just did regular math it
wasn't statistics or anything like that
okay um so so you you got a math degree
or did you get a math degree what like
how did you become a data scientist
um well i didn't i'm not a data
scientist per se i'm more of
somewhere in between i'm contract i'm
not i want to get the full-time role
eventually
but it's a lot just mostly a lot of like
working
on the side like freelancing stuff i'm
i'm not one of those people i i've
started out doing the freelancing
because
i'm like hey i need some money uber's
too too hard on my car i
don't want to do that and i want to do
something that i love and something i
can understand
so it started out that way then i
realized when i was doing that hey
you know i can learn a lot from it so my
freelancing switched from hey i gotta
pull in the cash too
hey let me pick the projects that i can
do maybe i can do
some uber stuff on the side they can
balance each other out
and i can pick the projects i want and i
can gain and i can gain
um the experience that i want from that
while using my math i mean
honestly most of the stuff i learned in
the university is just all theory but
when i actually was using it in these um
contract jobs then i'm like
oh that's how you use it
yeah you that's really cool so you're
learning these things
in you know in school and stuff like
that
but you weren't actually really learning
it or like at least applying it until
you got to these contract jobs
and and so okay did you take like
contract jobs
ones that you were sure you knew how to
do or some that you were like oh
i could probably figure this out what
type of what type of freelance jobs were
you aiming for
i usually took ones that i'm like i'm
just gonna figure this out as i go along
and just take the risk and if i fail out
well oh well i mean i can just i'm gonna
be
professional balance hey look this is
beyond my ability hey here are some
freelancers i know who can do the job
they can do a good rate that let's refer
to them thank you for your time i'm
sorry i can't do it and i mean i was
upfront and honest with the clients
um for the chinese and the japanese
clients i got those
pearson relatives and some friends and
those guys were
just as clueless to be honest they're
like
hey we saw this cool you do it and i'm
like okay i'll do it
and i mean they they usually they were
really good about pushing
so they were always like i saw this and
they're always ahead so they're like i
saw this can you do this
and that really pushed me from hey i'm
just doing a marketing basket analysis
with python to oh hey
i want you to do not only a market
basket analysis but i
saw this thing called k-means can you
show me how i can segment my customers
so that's that's how it evolved it
wasn't like a conscious step
i'm gonna go do k-means i'm gonna do nlp
i'm gonna do all this no
it's just completely from the clients
pushing
yeah you were you were figuring it out
as you went
and you didn't necessarily know
everything but you
you kind of figured it out and like if
you didn't know something where would
you try to uh
learn it and stack exchange
honestly and and reaching out to people
on linkedin so
if there was someone i knew or friends i
knew and said hey can you
help me with this i don't understand
this concept can you do can you tell me
more about it
or just go on stack exchange and say hey
can i look
like does this does this work because i
i
before i started using alteryx and all
this other stuff i had to like hand
program out stuff using
alchemy and that was a nightmare so it
was a lot of stack exchange a lot of
asking friends and then a lot of like
youtube tutorials i mean
you just got to grind your way through
it wow that's that's awesome i'm i'm
glad to hear that
and yeah i still use you know i still
use
google and stack exchange every single
day um all the time
even like for things that i definitely
should know how to do
um and things that i've looked up
probably ten times like if you looked at
my like browser history for that
particular link
i probably visited you know 20 times and
i should know it but i
i still use it every day it's it's a
great resource to have
as a uh as you know a data professional
um i want to go back to something you
said something interesting earlier
you said i don't know if i'm i'm quite a
data scientist yeah i'm aspiring to be a
full-time data scientist
and tell me more about your thoughts
about that what what are like what is
the definition
of a data scientist for you i mean
that's very nebulous because i mean we
hear debates all the time on linkedin
facebook credit about oh what's a data
scientist i've seen it in different
working with the data scientists i've
seen different ones i mean there's some
who are just have the title data
scientist and they just do pure excel
that's well they're doing statistical
analysis so that's still a data
scientist
then you have the other ones on the
other end who are just like programming
out a pipeline in addition to
you know getting statistical analysis
that's still a data scientist
i mean for me i mean i'm coming from a
culture where it's like you're not
really something until you actually get
it
so that's just my personal goal for
everyone else i mean
data scientist is a big title i mean
it's nebulous it's nebulous but for me i
really would like to work
someday professionally and in the role
instead you know as a contractor
yeah okay that's that's fair i think um
[Music]
notions of data science are very varied
and there's a lot of differences between
people's beliefs
um and some people are very like
conservative oh you're not a data
scientist
until you have worked as a data
scientist for five years
and you uh and you know how to use
neural networks convoluted like a
million like requirements you know
um crazy requirement yeah
exactly and some people are like oh uh
i did a linear regression so i'm a data
scientist
and it's in i think i mean i'm not going
to say that either of those are wrong
there's
there's a range of the terms data
scientists but i like i think i'm more
on the liberal side that like
if you're doing something with data you
can i
in fact i actually hate the title data
scientist i wish people would just say
i do data science right because it's
like
it's like you can and i think i think
people have a hard time realizing this
but you can do data science
without being a data scientist yeah
that's that's like saying you can't do
math unless you're a mathematician and
it's like no
there's lots of professions that use
math there's lots of examples
of where math is useful and you don't
have to be a mathematician
um so anyways i just thought it was
interesting that you were like i'm not
quite a data scientist yet
and in my mind in my mind i'll i'll give
you i'll give you the pass but i like i
like the ambition you're like oh no i
have a clear goal
i want to be a full-time data scientist
for some company and have the title
um i think that's cool um i do think
titles are overrated but i'm excited for
you
to get that title i think i think you're
on your way um
i did want to take we did have some
people pop in to say hello just wanted
to say hi to some people
we have natish here oh we have
sana here rolla here
uh time mirror um
and then i guess this this actually
transitions to my next question i had
derek's asking the company that you're
currently for
i guess the role is data governance
analyst
it's for brink's home is that correct uh
that is correct
what do they do are they a security
company what do they do they're not the
brinks they're not like the brinks
trucks guys they don't they're related
to them but they're not
connected to them they're a sister
company um mostly they deal with they're
kind of like adp
so they deal with a lot of home security
so you know like cameras
uh the stuff you put in your home
cameras panels
that sort of thing just to make sure
that you can't that people can't get
into your home they also do a lot of
monitoring
and uh and of that sort
as well so that's what that's what they
primarily do they're very specialized
okay they don't i mean home security is
huge
well home security is huge you know um
it's it's pretty crazy i mean it's a big
field you want you want to be able to
feel
safe um so i know it gets a little
complicated sometimes talking about
who you're currently working for you
know but in a broad sense are you able
to tell us what you do there and i guess
i'm specifically really interested oh
yes in the title data governance analyst
because i'm not sure i've heard that
title before so tell me a little bit
about that title and what you do
so i mean data governance analyst is
sort of like a data
a data analyst who's more focused on
like the governance aspect of the data
so ensuring data quality
documentation um qa so those are
the three primary stuff i i don't build
any pipelines or any of that sort
where i am but i am working with the
data engineering team
to govern those pipelines you know to
build out data models i i do a fair bit
of data modeling not data architecture
but data modeling like ensuring the
quality and heavily heavily working with
stakeholders so i mean
i would say 90 of my job is working with
stakeholders because
for data governance governance and
accuracy
or cleanliness of data it really depends
on the end user
so what could be good for like if i work
for adp
or some other company what their end
user terms as good quality data is
different
is different is different between
departments and different between
companies
so what a david government's analyst
does is to make sure that it meets those
requirements
build out the models for those
requirements and be able to
ensure that the data quality and the
query speed and
whatnot that have that that's important
for those is
is is working and also building out data
yeah okay i think i think that makes
sense that makes a little more sense now
um what how would you explain what data
governance is to someone who's maybe
never heard that term before
right data governance is basically
assumptions making sure that
model that however um put this
it's basically ensuring that the end
user has the quality
has the quality of data that they need
the right amount of data that they need
and also organizing the way that they
need and they can look at the metadata
or
the overall picture and see how each
piece of data is connected
it's it's one thing if you're just
building up data models or that stuff
but you have to see how one model is
connected
to another so business objects see how
they're connected to each other
and make sure that the data that they're
doing is the correct business logic
that's
being used there yeah
i think i think that's a great
explanation um it's actually kind of a
new term to me because i've always kind
of been
uh a data scientist and if you if you
think about like
the life cycle of a data um you know
data scientist is pretty far
down where the data has already been
thought of you know the ideas kind of
been thought of
the you know the data's been collected
the data's been maybe even cleaned and
then it finally gets to the data
scientists so
i'm still learning about data governance
but i think you explained it really well
it's making sure
we have you know the right amount of
data the right data
everyone can understand what that data
means like what's definition of it
everyone can like look at it everyone
can access it
it's in a format that works well for
people um it's kind of like
the first steps of all of all data
projects right does that sound right
that's correct it's the it's
infrastructure so if the infrastructure
is being built by the data engineers
we're the ones who assist the data
engineers we sit between the data
engineers
analytics and stakeholders to make sure
that the stakeholders are getting what
they want so
we're translating up project
requirements for the stakeholders we're
qaying the pipelines with them and we're
also
working extensively on the documentation
because the stakeholder we're the ones
who create
the documentation so the stakeholders
can understand is this model delivering
us the value that it's supposed to be
delivering or do we need to go back
and work the engineering teams to make
sure that it is
yeah that that that makes sense um
that's that's a big role
uh yeah translator yeah
you're basically like the connection
between the technology and the business
you know
like and and that's important because
the business people are the people that
have all the money that funds you know
all these projects and so your job is
really important because
you need to accurately talk to the
business people and say hey this is what
the tech people need
um and you also need to tell you know
the tech people hey
the other way around too you know you
need to also say hey tech people this is
what the business wants this is why
they're doing it
you're kind of like the middle link
between the two okay that's
that's correct that that's really cool
um
that that's great i think that's a
really interesting role and i think it
it helps you see all sides of the
the data you know the data life cycle at
this company
um uh we got a question here from from
derek
um and he says can you recommend any
personal projects that could help you
stand out if you wanted to get into data
work
with a home security company um so what
what type of i mean we'll probably talk
about projects more a little bit later
on
but specifically for a you know home
security or security in general what
type of projects would you recommend
um it really depends on what role you're
trying to go in for if you're trying to
be a data analyst i think
just as long as you got some experience
and you can as long as you're not
breaking things
you should be fine tableau is actually
really big for us and same with alteryx
um usually alters tableau of course you
know reporting but
alteryx really important for like
simplifying pipelines i mean sometimes
you don't want to build out the
pipelines because they're hard and
difficult to maintain
so alteryx is a quick solution of doing
that so alteryx i strongly recommend
that if you're a student
take advantage of it you've got a year
to do that if you have
that i swear i'm not plugging for
alterations i wish they'd pay me
and it would be okay if they did uh how
much is it if cause
because do you use it for for your
freelancing contract work or no
uh for my no i can't use my alteryx like
i'm still in school but i can't use my
alternates for that
but i have used i've used alteryx for
with different clients but alteryx will
literally save your life if you're
trying to build out
really very simple like pipelines or
machine learning pipelines it's it's
amazing
it's it's pretty much it's steroids
literally
okay uh let's let's grab it let's stay
on this alteryx train for a little bit
because
at exxon there were some people using it
a little bit
um and as a data scientist let's just
pretend i'm a data scientist i
i understand why for those who haven't
heard of alteryx
i'm actually a shareholder i own some
altera stock because i think i think it
is
useful what it does is it basically
allows you to like
drag and drop with like modules and like
icons
to do i wouldn't even call it data
analysis per se
maybe some some fringe data analytics
but mostly it's for like
data cleansing data organizing you know
getting your data from multiple sources
into one data set together is that
correct is that what alteryx kind of
does
that is correct um most most of the time
yeah that's what what you do it is it's
just
it's a way of doing all the joints and
all that other stuff without you know
having to go through it and it's really
useful for the stakeholders and for
let's say marketing
because market let's say engineering is
tied up marketing can just go and build
out
the flow and then use it temporarily and
then engineering can say oh
if we want to build a more lasting
pipeline then let's go look at it
alteryx has really gone farther in the
last i mean wow six
years year two years because they
started adding like
ml stuff into there so you can do
k-means you can do clustering
what not on there too i haven't tried
that but i've experimented with it
yeah interesting i didn't know they had
that that feature
um yeah that that is interesting because
then they're kind of getting
i mean that's k-means and stuff is kind
of basic ml
but um but then they're also kind of
competing with something like you know
data robot and these other no code
machine learning platforms
um okay so that's really good especially
if you don't have necessarily the coding
skills that kind of gives you
a little bit of a crutch where you don't
necessarily need to code
but you can do the things that you know
data analysts and data scientists do
um okay that's in that that is
interesting
um okay so going back to
to derek's question here um tableau is
really big for you guys
doing a project in the table would be
interesting
have a portfolio i i will not no i'm
going to emphasize that have a portfolio
site
for that yeah it helped me it helped you
did that also
because we also had a question here um
and i also see uh
uh taimir i see your question here but
we're gonna take a question here
from sanskriti um she's asking about how
to break into freelancing
um with with you know as a data
professional
is did your portfolio also help you get
into data freelancing
it did quite help quite a bit like some
of the stuff on my
github i mean it's kind of embarrassing
but still
it helped at least they can say hey well
at least you can do it we're not
we know that you're not some person off
the street just saying hey i can do it
but so that the portfolio helped um as
far as getting into freelancing i mean
there's no hundred percent easy way i
mean some of the ways i've done it is
like i've worked with catch a fire or
some of these other volunteer places
i've volunteered for some places to get
some experience
and sometimes if you work with enough of
them i mean
you they'll refer you to someone else
and say hey you know i know so and so
they can
this person knows how to do this i mean
even if it's excel
um as far as like making the money from
that i
wouldn't be the best person to do that
because i i'm not i did turn a profit on
that one
but um the best way to do is just go on
fiverr
or upwork and then just take it from
there it the
learning how to bid properly and pricing
yourself it's the hardest part
that is the hardest one because
sometimes you'll underprice yourself
and then some people won't go after you
and then sometimes you'll over price
yourself and then someone doesn't go
after you
so that's an art and i mean putting out
the description and making sure it's
sustained and you're marketing yourself
that's an art and something i'm still
trying to figure out myself
so yeah yeah it's it's definitely hard
um
you definitely when you become a
freelancer you
you have to manage more than just the
technical things that you may have done
previously right
because all of a sudden now you're a
business owner so you have to figure out
how to get paid how to pay taxes you
know
uh how to market yourself how to get
clients you know
uh it's it's a lot of work it's a lot
more than just the technical side um
and it can be difficult to get started
um i do like what you said you know
some maybe you volunteer for free for
some place and get experience
um you know i'm i run my own data
analytics firm
right so i have employees that do
projects you know for clients for me and
stuff like that
and right now i'm i'm working for free i
i work
i'm doing a it is halfway for school uh
but i
i'm doing a project with the utah jazz
because i want to get experience in
sports analytics you know
so sometimes you do have to work for
free to get that experience and
and start somewhere right um
i also like you said you know maybe
fiverr or upwork i've had
way more success on upwork i think
upwork especially for
people inside the united states is a
better platform
and you know you can create a profile
there and and start small
going back to what we talked about
originally about taking on projects
sometimes where you don't necessarily
know what you're doing
i took a project once to build a website
basically
in d3 javascript and like i had no idea
how to do it
and i just i just i put a really low
price and i just instead of paying to
learn i got paid to learn
um it wasn't it wasn't the greatest
project and it wasn't the greatest
outcome but
it was really cheap for them and i
learned a lot so uh
i i got that project done up work so
upwork's pretty cool i'm also i'm also a
shareholder of upwork so i'm i'm a big
fan i believe in their uh
and their platform um okay
here's another question we had here from
taimir um you're
you're you know you're studying data
science not not necessarily data
scientists yet but a data
analyst and you've done a lot of
contract work any tips for self-taught
data scientists
in terms of getting a job when entry
requirements are
so
[Music]
oh i guess any advice basically on on
getting that first data science job
well just you need to put in i'm gonna
say it over and over again you have to
have a portfolio i mean
i have a nice website portfolio website
i mean you might shell out 120 on wix or
even or if you want to do
cheaper method do it on github but have
a nice portfolio website showcasing your
stuff show
if and tailor it to the job that you're
going for
so i mean i did a general tailoring i
had um
tableau i had my tableau portfolio and
then i had some some of my projects that
i worked on
on my own for that so
make sure that you have that the first
step is you have to make sure
that they can look at it and say hey
this person's worth my
investment and it's going to deliver
value don't overstate it
because if you overstate it if you can
you still have to go through two people
first you have to go through the hr hr
doesn't know always
what the heck they're looking at they
like shiny i'm gonna
put it bluntly they do like that they
want to see who they can refer to the
hiring manager the hiring manager has to
go through your portfolio
if they do that so make sure that it's
simple enough for them to understand if
you
can put explanations in what you're
doing right i mean
i i've seen people put power points like
with some of their portfolio
in their github so so that the hiring
manager or the hr person can look at
that
and you still have to explain the
business value because i mean in the end
you're still making money for that
company you're still an investment in
them
you're still you're still have to
deliver value to the projects you do
so it's don't always focus on the tech
focus on like what the value of your
project is so
that's what you should focus on and if
there's an industry you're targeting
do projects in that industry yeah
that sells for them better it does i
always say
if you really want a particular job in a
particular company
try to think of a problem that keeps
them up at night and try to tackle that
as a personal project right um and even
if you don't even finish it or even if
you're not sure the analysis is done
just the act of thinking through that
shows so much more initiative than just
submitting your resume
um yeah i totally agree with with what
you said i think i think that makes a
lot of sense
um do you do you have a project
that you a favorite project of yours
that you've done that you could talk
about it could either be
a personal project or something you did
as you know contracting or school
uh two actually so first one was i did
some nlp for some
chinese company when i for some chinese
company that my
wife knows my wife knows so we were
basically going through
um comments on their on one of the
review sites in one of the review sites
and we were scraping
we were scraping the reviews so and then
using nlp to actually
parse it out to see what it was so that
was a little difficult because
my chinese isn't as good as my chinese
isn't that good oh it was in chinese
yeah i couldn't read i it fairly i can
read it but i'm not i can't speak it
some and then
more complex stuff's harder so i had to
help have her help
so in that regard i mean trying to build
out the corpus was a little
the corpus like the words that you
should exclude wasn't hard but trying to
do the sentiment analysis
that was hard so we were in i ended up
having to work with someone
who understood this and it was a
technical review website so
you had to know exactly what's going on
so that was working back and forth on
that
wow um though the second one was
when i was working with uh tula and that
was interesting so
we took all the email data we took all
the
sales data and then we looked for
patterns to see like what kind of stuff
the customer
bought associate the association
association rules you know
market basket analysis so once we found
out customers were like hey they bought
this product product a
and product b let's start we use that
data to
build out like email lists so that we
could send out to the individuals who
bought who bought the who bought one
product but didn't buy the complimentary
product so
someone didn't buy uh someone bought a
top but they didn't buy a skirt so we
would
use would see which customers didn't buy
a skirt and then we would
create a list and then use that to mark
it out remark it to those customers
saying hey buy a skirt buy a skirt so
that was
that was a pretty good project that i i
worked with at one time
wow yeah that's that's really
interesting i liked i liked both those
projects
um okay now is there a technical
skill or a software that you like the
most
oh i am starting to like azure
and i'm starting to like go a lot um go
i'm not
i'm no expert i wish i was a software
developer on that but
it's i really liked it um some of the
stuff like would go
that i didn't have with python like
python assumes stuff but
go it's a lot you have to spell things
out and i'm i'm kind of
that kind of guy because of my
documentation stuff so i i like the fact
that you can
have to spell everything out like where
the date like where the data is
um you have to define all the
the data paths that sort of thing i'm
still learning but as far as azure goes
i love azure i mean
some people are confused about like the
the
user interface i agree it is but it's so
powerful i mean using data factory using
data bricks
using ml uh ml studio i mean it's
changed my life
i mean it really speeds up building up
pipelines where
you know it's easily maintainable it's
not
you don't have to go through like tons
of line of code and go through code
endless code reviews for it
and it's easy to to govern it too
because the governance like
is connected all within the same package
that's yeah that's that's really
interesting um i mean
azure for those who don't know it's
microsoft's
like basically data studio basically
like you can do a lot of different
things with with azure it's their their
cloud solution i guess
um including all those things you know
that matt mentioned
um it does it does give access to
machine learning via you know drag and
drop
clicking which which does take the
coding out of out of the data science
which is which is
really useful and nice for people who
don't necessarily
have that coding background it could be
a great place for them
you know to uh to start um
what are you using go for i mean that's
not something you typically hear
associated with you know data
professionals so is it mostly for
i guess what is it what is it for i just
wanted to statically type language
i found python as just likes to assume a
lot of things so
i'm like hey might as well learn
something i mean i took c before when i
was like in
community college so i wanted a balance
i don't know where it's gonna go i'm
just mostly doing it for fun at this
point
okay okay cool i i like i like learning
for fun i think that's always
a good thing to do um okay
so let's let's tackle uh this question
um what what advice would you give to
people who want to get started as a data
professional
is there is there something that you
would uh you would tell them or like i
know you're kind of on
your path to you know fully becoming a
data scientist professional full-time
right but i guess what what advice would
you give to people who are getting
started
as data professionals well first off i
mean you already have some of the skills
i mean when i was trying
to sell myself into data analyst
positions and then my current position
as a data governance analyst
i tailored my resume i said okay what
did i read through
the thing and said hey look what do i
have already that i have
so i said okay i already did some stuff
with python i already did some stuff
with excel i already did some data
analysis
like doing some statistics when i was in
school so
people do have the stuff that's already
there
they're not what what what my advice is
to look through what you really take a
hard look at what you've done so far
look through it look through the
position or the goal or the company or
or the role you're targeting and say
okay what do i have already
that i can use for the next position
because almost guaranteed you have
something
i mean it might not be much but
companies do take
a chance on people who don't have a
hundred percent like
of the job description so if you're even
60 50
60 percent of the job description just
apply i mean
the the the can the the description that
they're putting on there is the ideal
candidate
and usually that ideal candidate isn't
going to go for that position
from what i found even one of the hr
people told me this
yeah 100 i love that it's like
use the skills that you or at least like
believe in the skills that you do have
um put them on your resume even if
you've just touched them
once and you can figure it out like
let's say like it says
oh you need to know tableau and let's
say you've opened tableau and maybe
you've made two dashboards or something
nothing crazy
you know put tableau on your resume and
when
if you get to the next round they're
like hey tell me about the details of
tableau
well you should in the in the week in
between you know
before your interview you should just
learn everything you can about tableau
there's no
there's no need to be an expert at
everything in order for it to be on your
resume
um you know if you used it once put it
on your resume
and and if you're a good thinker you
know you can learn it and figure it out
later um
so i agree with that and yeah i also
think like
years experience and like yeah having
everything on a job description you're
totally right that job descriptions are
really the ideal candidate
and you don't need to be the ideal
candidate you just have to be the right
candidate right
um and and also sometimes they're the
ideal candidate and like the
the salary don't match up so it's like
they're never going to get someone with
all those skills for the salary they're
offering so
maybe they'll take you you never know
you never know until you try
exactly exactly okay sweet
um last question here for you um
you post on linkedin fairly often why
why do you post on linkedin and i guess
when did you start posting on linkedin
honestly i started posting like
sorry just keep going yeah i started
posting on linkedin because i mean
i just wanted to like i keep seeing
people like who are the same as me
worrying about
oh can i get this job oh this seems hard
why are they asking for a phd for like a
dating
so i just wanted to get posting because
i'm like hey you know i've gone through
some of this i've been in the same place
as you have
and the reality is it's just it's not as
hard as it looks
and i just wanted to give some
clarification also i just
spend a lot of time thinking about some
of this stuff on my spare time
and i thought hey you know if i can like
and that's why i even subscribe to you
or
other or other people on linkedin it's
hey you know these guys are giving
me a view of what's on the inside how
would i give my view because the more
views that people can have
that can give them more perspective on
what their path is
where they want to go and maybe they'll
start applying for a position and
realize hey i'm actually qualified for
this position i don't need to
overthink it so little bits of
information
from from me from other people in the
data science community that's
that's powerful yeah i totally agree and
that's very um
altruistic of you to be to be posting to
to help other people
along the way um i guess what good have
you seen
from posting on linkedin like has has
do you regret posting on linkedin do you
wish you posted more are you happy with
where you're posting right now
i'm happy where i'm posting right now
i'm fairly busy with other stuff between
like self-study and then work
so i mean i'm posting as much as i as i
possibly could
um i would like to post more in the
future though
okay well that's awesome i i love your
posts i'm a big fan
um definitely once again if you're if
you're watching right now or you're
listening
definitely look up matthew blasa and uh
and add him
on linkedin to get some of his tips on
you know
being a data professional what it's like
to be involved
in data management and data governance
as well as doing freelance and contract
uh data analytics work um
matt that's all the questions i i have
for you is there anything else you'd
you'd like to say to the people of the
data career podcast
yeah i mean don't give up it's it might
look really really hard and if you're
not frustrated that's
if you're frustrated that's normal you
should be frustrated you should be
wanting to quit half the time
it's the the mentality is if you push
through that and say okay can i step
back
can i is this what i really want and you
still keep going forward
you're all the stronger for it when you
go into an interview and when you go
into
and when you work i mean it's it's the
mentality that you need to like push
through this because
it just gets more frustrating as when
you're in the job than
when you're searching for it so
yeah i love that don't don't don't give
up
it might take a while but it's uh it's
worth it
you know working in data is really fun
and really rewarding
um so don't give up if it gets too hard
i love that matt
what a great piece of advice to go out
on
um love it uh okay thank you everyone
who watched
live um i know we had people like derek
and taimir
and sana and other people thank you guys
for joining live
thank you matt for being here appreciate
it once again connect with him on
linkedin um and yeah thank you guys for
an awesome session we'll be i'll be back
later tonight
um if you're listening to the podcast
it's not tonight but if you're live
uh for the ask avery show at 6 p.m
mountain time which is 8 p.m eastern
and this yeah that's about it
thank you guys appreciate you all thank
you matt for joining
and we'll see you guys on the next
episode of the data career podcast
all right thank you bye-bye

Title: Geology + Data Science with Matt Francsis

Description: Join us for a live recording of the Data Career Podcast! Matt Francis, currently a data scientist at General Mills, will be joining and talking about his pivot from oil and gas into data. We'll touch on what advice he has for geologists and engineers to break into data science, as well as how data science can be used in the field. 

Matt's a hoot so if you don't already follow him on LinkedIn, be sure to give him a follow and watch/listen to the episode!

#Engineering #DataScience #OilAndGas

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hey everyone welcome to episode 21 of
the data career podcast
uh we have an awesome episode for you
here today we have matt francis joining
us matt welcome to the data career
podcast
hey everybody hey everybody thanks for
having me yes for everyone who's
watching live go
go ahead and say hello we can see you in
the comments um and excited to have you
guys for those who are not listening
live
hi to you guys too we can't see your
comments though um
i'm gonna give a quick introduction for
those who don't know matt if you're
watching live or if you're in a podcast
go ahead and press pause and search matt
francis
on linkedin and give him a follow uh
matt's a really cool guy really active
on linkedin i'm currently a data
scientist for general mills
and that's the company that makes some
of my favorite foods including lucky
charms
yoplait and pillsbury i love lucky
charms lucky charms underrated
um he's worked as a data scientist for
how do i say tessella
tessella tesella which is a data science
consulting firm
as well as oil major conocophillips
his undergrad is in geology from the
university of wisconsin
madison and then he's earned a master's
in geology from virginia tech
like i said super active on linkedin and
focuses on helping
geoscientists and oil professionals to
transfer or use data
science skills in their career so super
excited to have matt on the podcast
really good resource for all of you for
everyone but also
specifically for geologists and
engineers
specifically in the oil and gas field
that's that's his experience and
excited to learn a lot from him today um
so anyways thanks for being on the pod
matt appreciate it yeah no problem
thanks for having me yeah so we're gonna
get right into it
i would love to know how you got into
data because we just went through your
background
right and geology is you know
we heard a lot about geology there how
did you get into data
man i i sort of just like fell into it
almost
um and it was it was a product of
the uh the insane commodity cycle that
that oil and gas
uh kind of interacts with and and
is the uh the victim of almost
so i was laid off uh from conoco
phillips in in 2018
spent uh six years with them before that
doing a lot of different
geology tasks um but
but never was was coding was
never really doing a lot of deep
data analysis um i mean geology as a
profession
is like analytically focused it's a it's
a science
we we look at interpret
and you know
make make recommendations based on those
interpretations of various
geology data whether it's rocks
fluids or whatnot
and but i i didn't i didn't have a
strong
but data science background coming out
of conoco phillips
after i was laid off i was not thinking
i was going to jump into data science i
i was like
wanted to to get back into a another
geology role for another
oil company because that's
that's what i was that was my label
that's what i labeled myself
that's what everybody else had labeled
me
but after you know struggling to to find
interviews and opportunities in the
geology space i i started
you know thinking about what i could do
in my time
to skill up to make myself more
attractive to
oil and gas companies and make myself
more valuable as a
as a future employee sort of
fell into uh enrolling into a data
science bootcamp through a company
called thinkful
um online based bootcamp and i think
we'll probably talk to
boot camps in a little bit but though
the more i study the more
practice i i i did um you know
learning python learning machine
learning
building analyses and machine learning
models to
predict things during the during the
course of the boot camp the more i fell
in love with it
and realized that what i actually loved
about
geology was not like the rocks um
it was more of the analytical framework
and
thinking uh behind behind the work that
i was doing as a as a
geologist so at
at some point i i had the realization
that i was going to be easier to find an
entry-level data science job or
analytics job then
then find another geology job in a very
difficult
uh oil and gas job market um
and sort of uh you know hit the ground
running
and then shifted my job search from from
geology jobs to data science
uh and essentially started at tesella as
a data science consultant
um immediately following my my boot camp
wow that there's a lot to uh unpack
there that's that's a really cool story
um thank you for sharing with us um i'm
gonna i'm gonna touch on the
the geology thing so you said you didn't
really like
necessarily the rocks in geology but you
like the problem solving behind it right
yeah so i mean
the is super nerdy but like i didn't
ever really care about
petroleum systems or learning about
oil rocks specifically um
and and i had that slow realization i
don't think i actually
really realized it well while i was
employed as a geologist at
conocophillips but
looking back on it i i could certainly
see myself being
becoming less enamored with the actual
day-to-day activities
and and what i was having to uh or being
asked to think through
as part of that job so i i still enjoy
thinking about like earth systems
and thinking about how the earth has
evolved over the last four and a half
billion years
but i wasn't getting that satisfaction
out of
thinking about oil rock specifically and
it's a super niche thing
um and and for me to be
saying that that i like some rocks but
not other rocks is
it probably sounds weird to some people
um
but that's that's kind of the what i
felt like
it was almost like yeah i i enjoy this
broad field but i don't enjoy doing this
one niche thing
and i'm comfortable enough walking away
from that
yeah that makes sense did you find that
your skills that you had learned
you know through an undergrad and a
master's in geology and then through you
know six years of working
did you find that those geology skills
transferred over into data science well
or not really
uh so like the the broad-based um
analytical thinking skills communication
skills those sorts of things
definitely do transfer um
but like i mentioned i wasn't i wasn't
coding i
wasn't i wasn't querying databases with
sql
i was as building um visualizations in
in excel and
sometimes in spot fire but i wasn't
doing anything
fancy i mean i built a couple of linear
regressions in excel and used those
occasionally but
i i mean there there were no
the the technical skills don't overlap
really between the
between the two professions um at least
they didn't when when i was
employed uh three years ago as a
geologist
so there wasn't much for me to take from
geology
and and and use that um at least in in
my day-to-day as a as a data scientist
like technically but what i do have from
that
is the communication skills is the
strategic thinking
um a lot of the projects that i was
working on as a geologist have
had really long time scales so from the
from the moment i would work on a
project
it might be six months a year
five years down the road before that
project would ever be
potentially realized by the business so
it was always a strategic view on what
work can we do today
to impact the business in the future and
i'm taking that strategic level thinking
into into my role as a data scientist
and looking at
what the business is doing now and then
thinking about how we can
enhance and enable that work to be done
now
but also looking towards the future and
how we can
uh build something better for the
business
yeah okay that makes sense so at least
some of the the strategic thinking as
well as the
communications and just like problem
solving analytical skills transferred
well but maybe not all that all the
technical
um uh and let's talk about your your
first job
outside of that boot camp um at tesella
why were they interested in you like how
did you land that job did did the boot
camp kind of help there
or what what was the path to that first
job outside of the bootcamp
yeah so so tessella is kind of a
specialty
data and analytics consulting company
one of their core industries that that
they serve is
is energy and oil and gas so they were
really interested in my background as a
geologist as somebody
with the technical understanding and
their operational experience
in the oil and gas sector um
as well as somebody having at least some
elementary
analytics and machine learning data
science skills to go on top of that
um so so the the background is what
piqued their interest
my experience at the boot camp was
[Music]
highlighted during the interview process
so i was talking through
a number of my different projects
and and highlighting those
uh and apparently impressing them enough
with
with the project-based work that uh that
they that they
handed me a job offer and i happily
accepted
okay awesome so i'm hearing a couple of
things there well well first yeah
i was curious about if if tessella did
data science in like energy or in
geology sounds like that was that was
true
so i think that's something that's good
to highlight to people
that even though if your background
isn't in data often that's that's often
preferred because
data doing data science for data science
sake is kind of stupid
you're always trying to solve a business
problem at the end of the day right
and if you have the background the
business background or the domain
background
and then you add these data skills it
can make you really valuable and you
know some companies
rather have you know someone with domain
skills
with with the technical skills added but
versus just hiring a straight data
science because
like if you if you're a straight data
scientist and you've never touched
in the domain i i like to give this
example when i i was at exxon so we have
kind of the similar
you know petroleum energy backgrounds we
had data science competitions um
and most time it was just like me as
like the only like engineer
versus all of these like i.t data
scientists and we had one project
where um it had to do with like
basically
oil purity and just like oil properties
and
they were always like okay so there's
there's a lot of sulfur in this oil
is that good or is that bad you know and
that's just something as an i.t
data scientist you never understand the
domain well enough
versus as a chemical engineer i'm like
okay that's the first thing you need to
know if you work for an oil company
is that sulfur is bad for oil and
you just don't get the domain knowledge
unless you have the domain knowledge
so i'm glad i'm glad to hear they saw
that in you um
and just going back to the the the thing
that also impressed them you said it was
mostly the projects
that the projects you've done in the
boot camp what like i guess what
projects did you do and
how did you how did you pitch them to
this company
yeah so i mean uh and and i want to go
back to the domain experience
uh uh in a little bit uh because it's
it's a fascinating transition my uh
taking this new role in in general mel's
just a couple months ago but
i think we'll we could touch on that a
little bit later yes uh
um so like projects
i mean tessella is really keen
on continuous learning
and and showing that that you can
continuously skill up
learn new things quickly so what i
actually did is
is i showed them a project that i was
working on at the time i
it was not complete it wasn't finished
um it was a work in progress
so i i walked them through um
i think it was an nlp project that i was
working on that
i had scraped some uh transcripts of ted
talks from youtube
and i was trying to classify them and
see
which or see if i could classify them
into
certain topics uh through
some some clustering and then see if i
could
distinguish which topics uh got more
more views more likes more engagement so
it was a way to like
try to help ted
uh book more talks of of things that
would get more engagement
so that's that's the sort of logic that
i was talking through it wasn't
that i said i i did this machine
learning i use this machine learning
uh algorithm to solve this problem that
the boot camp handed me with this data
set that they also handed me
this was an open-ended do an nlp
project so i was like okay um what
sounds interesting to me and
it took me probably a week to find to
figure out what i wanted to do for that
project
um i hadn't seen anybody try to do this
sort of project before
so it was it was new to me to scrape the
data
it was new to me to do the the types of
clustering that i was trying
it was new to me to do some of the nlp
work that i was doing
and all of this was new and i and i kept
it uh saying that well
while i was presenting them like i i
don't know if this is gonna work i don't
know if this is right
but here's what i'm learning here's
where i was like
three weeks ago and here's how much
here's how quickly i've
skilled up and and here are my
recommendations and here's my path
forward for the
rest of the analyses and i think that's
what really struck them
as something interesting uh and and
important especially in the consulting
role where you're always
jumping in and expected to deliver very
quickly
um and and i think that's really what
what played
strongly to to their interests but that
that goes into like
understanding what the interests of each
company that you're interviewing for
are and uh understanding
how you can potentially weave a
narrative that will pique their interest
yeah i i love that i love that uh
the idea of doing not even having the
project done
you know that's so cool because i think
a lot of people will have
fears about sharing an unfinished
project you know
they'll have like imposter syndrome
that's not good enough
like i don't actually know if this is
gonna work but you just kind of embrace
that and that that seems that
that was interesting to them um i think
that takes a lot of bravery but i think
it also shows
humility the the ability to continuously
learn you're like i don't know
everything but i want to know and i'm
going to try these things
um and i think also just talking through
that probably was really impressive
because i think a lot of the time
when we're talking to recruiters they're
more curious about the way your brain
works
and the way you approach problems than
how you have solved problems in the past
i mean obviously they want to see what
you've done in the past but
they're they're like okay well how did
you think through that problem because
that's what's important to them right
yeah and especially coming from like uh
somebody without experience i mean
you're not gonna have any any metrics to
to fall back on
you're not going to have any dollars and
cents to to say that you
you provided value into a company so
you've got to stand out somehow
um and actually that's that's not the
only time that i've i've showcased an
unfinished project i did it uh
late last year when i was kind of
interviewing for a number of different
uh companies during during the time i
was interviewing with general mills
i essentially had a project idea that
kind of fit the niche of this specific
company
i i had aspirations of of getting like
some sort of poc model
out the door by the time i i interviewed
uh but it turned out that i i didn't
have time in the week
leading up to that interview so i just
laid out in a slide deck you know
what my thought process was what i was
thinking about doing
um and and how what this new
sort of data product would be for that
company
and this is so you were applying for
this company and you did this project
just so you could basically talk to them
about it during the interview is that
correct
yeah that was that was my goal uh
because they won they wanted another
presentation or a presentation on some
sort of project
um and i didn't have anything that kind
of fit the bill of
of what this company does so i was like
okay
i i i've got a cool idea for a project
let me see if i can get something out
the door
um i couldn't make that happen but i i
had a lot of ideas
so i kind of messaged them up in in a
nice
slide deck uh and said this is what i
would do
here's my thought um i would try this
and this using this data
and here's where the value would be and
here's who the customer would be
i i think that's awesome everyone who's
watching or listening
definitely take note here the the idea
that you can just
i mean you can do this you can always
just apply to every single job the exact
same way
right um that's definitely a possibility
but if you really want to be really
effective you need to tailor your
application
to every job you're doing and in this
case i mean matt webb pretty far
and he did like a project specifically
tailored for this person he was
interviewing for
um but you can do that with your resume
you can do that with your cover letter
you can shift things around to highlight
different attributes of yourself so that
you're more attractive
to this specific um interviewer that
you're interviewing for
um so you might have you might you know
you might have
let's say you have five data science
projects but on your resume you only
have room for two of them
you might highlight the two that are
most applicable to the industry or you
might make a six
that's really you know you think about
what keeps this company up late at night
like what are they worried about what
are some problems they have
and then try to solve that problem for
them even even if you don't even
complete solving the problem for them
just show that you've put some thought
into it
um i think that can go a lot away so
that's that's a great example matt
everyone definitely follow matt's
example there
um i see we have a question here from
sadia that i want to take on
um but i'll take it on after uh we go
back to a little bit about that domain
knowledge
so you're applying for new well you you
get out of this boot camp
you apply for tessella they're
interested in you because you have
you know you're kind of new to the data
science world but you have some
technical skills
um and you have a really good domain
background so they like you for that
they hire you you work as you know a
data science consultant for however many
you know years and i'm i'm guessing you
continue to learn
as you're going right okay um and then
eventually
you're to the point now where your
domain
background doesn't necessarily need to
help you you know you
you took the first step and you got a
job that you
you know you could qualify for because
you were kind of leaning heavily on the
domain background
then after being there for however many
years you were you no longer needed the
domain background crutch you could kind
of apply for any data science position
is that right
yeah definitely so uh that's that's how
it felt
um that's not that's not what i did i
wasn't applying to
to every every company out there so
because i had a job because i was
employed as a data scientist i could
then pick and choose
you know where he could be picky yeah um
being picky isn't isn't necessarily
great because
you know if you you're just
you're putting out less chances to to
have interviews and to get
positions but yeah i mean moving from
tesella
doing mainly oil and gas consulting
to general mills making uh grocery
products
food products cheerios lucky charms
tricks
yoplait um you know there's there's
absolutely no domain experience
crossover there
um so i'm i'm now something like five
months into this new job and i'm
i'm still soaking uh soaking up
uh new information on on a daily hourly
basis
um but that's okay because i i know
how to implement uh
solutions how to talk to business
stakeholders
and get engagement from them how to set
strategic
goals and get gain alignment um
so it's it's not necessarily
it's not necessary for me to have the
domain experience um
but now i'm being asked to bring more of
that technical experience
and into into this position
how has it been have you liked it so far
yeah it's been really fascinating um
i i now when i go in the grocery store
now i i look at it completely
differently
um you don't realize how methodically
it is laid out and and categorized
um so like we we think about like center
store
sales which is like boxed goods um
and then and then you've got the outer
aisles you've got refrigerated section
i mean you you you know that when you go
into a grocery store but you don't think
about like
how a business categorizes things and
how they cluster things together
and you don't also you also don't
realize that like the sales that
that you see at grocery stores those are
not put on by the actual grocery stores
um the the producers of that food
pay for that sale in the grocery store
so
when you see lucky charms uh like two
for
four um that's that's general mills
paying
walmart or target to put that promotion
on so
actually that's that's like a large part
of what i'm doing is trying to
optimize those those sales those
promotions in order to drive
uh greater volume of of sales and bigger
revenue but
um yeah i mean trying to huck cheerios
is much different than
trying to do poc oil and gas machine
learning projects which is completely
different than
doing uh oil field exploration
yeah wow that's interesting um yeah
now i'm gonna think of the grocery store
a lot different um i know i've done
uh a homework problem kind of about like
grocery stores and what's bought in
pairs you know like
you whenever you buy cereal you're
probably buying milk
um and where do you want to put those
items
you know how do you optimize those items
best for your store to to make profit
and stuff like that
um i guess is there any other like
gender i know you probably can't get
into specifics but like general
ideas that you're working on currently
for general mills
that you can speak on and if not maybe
talk about an example
of how data science was used at like
tesla kind of for geology
if there's anything that you can speak
on i know that that kind of gets iffy
yeah so i mean at general mills uh the
most of what i'm doing
is is supporting a an in-house
application that that we've built um to
optimize our
our sales at grocery stores um
i mean other things that we do are are
like more manufacturing relateds how to
optimize the throughput of a
manufacturing line like we make
old el paso is one of our brands so how
do we how do we make tortillas with less
waste
uh product um so there was
there was a poc project that went on uh
last year with uh with a camera over the
assembly line
it it uh estimated that the diameter of
the
tortillas coming off the line if if they
were outside of spec
it would send that message up up the
line and
the the machinery would automatically
resize
the the press to eliminate waste
which saved hundreds of thousands of
dollars i think uh annually on
on tortilla manufacturing so uh that
that was one example from
from from us um
in in terms of geology
it's it's actually difficult and and
part of the reason it's difficult is
because i've been on game now for
three years um but
i think geology is
one of the fields that's going to be
most difficult to implement
data science solutions for
um because it's got a a data problem
um g like rock data
is super expensive to get and it's
super spatially uh variable and
and and limited quant in quantity so
i mean i was working offshore gulf of
mexico exploration
we had something like 50
different wells that that penetrated the
the sections that we were interested in
so you're thinking about the whole gulf
of mexico but you've only got 50 samples
um to use to base your models on you're
not
you you don't need machine learning to
to do that you can mentally
handle uh that quantity of data
and and do some simple statistics based
off of that
um what's more interesting from a from a
data science perspective
in oil gas is um the the chemical
stuff that that you would have been
interested in every
uh production trends
stuff that is more operationally based
where you've got sensor data coming in
every second every half second every
minute
even even daily data is is
much more uh there's there's so much
more of it
to do more things with than than you do
of like actual rock data
um and then kind of in the intermediate
spaces
uh fields that are adjacent to to
geology this is going to be super niche
just to own gas folks but
things like petrophysics reservoir
engineering and
geophysics where you do have a better
sampling of the subsurface
with more continuous data um that is
where i've seen
kind of the most activity um in terms of
data science
applications because you do have that
data to actually
utilize yeah that that makes sense you
have to have data to do data science so
if you have limited data yep that makes
it hard okay thank you for sharing the
tortilla thing was was really cool too
um yeah super fascinating i'll think
about that more when i'm when i'm eating
my tricks in the morning what data
science went into
went into making this um okay great
let's transition a little bit
back to education and career building
um i wanted to get to this question here
from
from saudia um can you talk a little bit
more about the advantages of going to a
boot camp versus an online master's
program
and and i have some thoughts on this but
i'd love to hear your thoughts on it
yeah sure so uh there's like two
two main things that i think of um when
when thinking about uh kind of an
a pivot an educational pivot into into
data science
so that's kind of speed and cost
i think uh uh i mean a boot camp is
going to be is going to be faster
and it should be cheaper than the
masters program
it's definitely not going to have the
depth and probably not the quality
that uh that a master's program is going
to have
just because it's it's wrapping up in in
20 weeks or something
rather than two years um
that being said i do think there's a
place for boot camps
um i don't think that they're for
everyone
um but they can be used
quite effectively i mean i'm i'm an
example of that
uh i i think the the the people who
should be
doing boot camps are either
either those that have some uh
technology background uh coding
experience um or like a stem degree
somebody somebody that's a highly
analytical thinker
uh will probably do just fine in a boot
camp scenario
uh a master's program is is better off
for people
that are coming from uh further afield
the like the
i don't know the
artists the english majors the
the people without traditional
backgrounds
that's where you're going to probably
see the most benefit of doing a master's
program
yeah this is pretty interesting because
you've done a boot camp
and i've done a master's program so
it's kind of funny together we have kind
of uh i guess dueling
educations um and
it's hard to really know fully what the
other experience is you know because
i've never been in a boot camp right
i know you've done a master's right um
did you do that
did you do that full time like in person
the the masters yeah
yeah okay in in geology yeah
so it's also interesting because i did
my master's online
part-time um so there's just differences
there
um i agree with what a lot with a lot of
what you said
um don't think boot camps are for
everyone but i definitely think there's
a good place for them
um i do agree that i think if you have
um
a stem background specifically like if
we were going into science and
engineering like i just think
i think they make great data scientists
you those analytical skills like we
talked about earlier
transfer really well problem solving
transfers really well
um you know a lot of the math or at
least you can learn a lot of the math
um i think that's very true um i'm i'm
gonna be posting a little bit more about
this in the future
i'm a little disappointed with my
masters to be perfectly honest
um it was okay it was an okay experience
it got worse as it went on which is
interesting
um it's and i went to i went to georgia
tech and it's it's one of the best
like online masters for data science
that there is so it's not like
some crappy program it's a good program
but i think they
they scaled pretty large and it was
pretty difficult for them just like keep
up with the amount of numbers they were
having in the course
i didn't find the teaching particularly
engaging
um i had one course where they like
pretty much taught you nothing and
you're just supposed to google
everything
which which is fine i actually like that
like i think
i think that's what i do yeah
that's real life yeah and i'm i'm fine
with that like
i'm actually okay with that but it was
just it was a little sporadic all over
the board
um so anyways i think i think both can
be good
i think what you said is good the the
price point and
the time it takes is is is really big
um yeah price point's huge because
sometimes
a master's is more expensive like they
can be like 40 grand right
and sometimes like at georgia tech it's
12 grand and a boot camp can be 20 grand
so yeah
there's definitely price points there um
one thing that i'm i'm trying to do to
help people with this is i'm basically
taking
the good out of the georgia tech
analytics program
and doing my own boot camp it's gonna be
two thousand dollars which is which is a
lot cheaper than
you know most boot camps yeah um so
i think there's because i definitely
think you don't need a master's i don't
think you need one unless you want one
you know yeah
so and and and let's the like the
unasked question is like
which certificate is better and and i i
hate that question
the the certificate doesn't matter um
it's your skills that do
the the masters might get you
noticed more often during like the hr
screening process um
but but at the end of the day i'm i'm of
the opinion that
that either one is is fine
and and i don't think the certificate
the name on the certificate doesn't
matter
as as long as you're on there somewhere
yeah the the certificate and you have a
post about this i think it's even in
your
your featured section maybe i don't know
um that basically says
i'm sick of people posting their
certificates they don't matter
um and that's so true and that's the
whole point
i'm trying to think i don't i don't look
in my office trying to find my diploma i
don't know where my diploma is
for for any of my degrees i actually
know where mine is but it's still in the
box
okay it's a piece of paper eight years
later it's a piece of paper
no one cares about a piece of paper in
tech now you know what they care about
is what you talked about
your projects right you said even your
bootcamp
it wasn't the certificate that made them
interested or or maybe it maybe the
bootcamp helped you get through the hr
screening like you said
but when it actually comes down to
getting hired it's
it's the projects that you've done um
and so that's that's one thing i'm
really focusing on
with with data career jumpstart is
there's no homework ever
you know there's zero homework there's
only projects and
that's how we learn everything is by you
do a project so
you want to learn python great we're
starting right in with the project you
don't get a warm-up we're just doing a
project
and then you add it to your portfolio
and then when you when you get an
interview you know you have
you have your project that you can
present to someone so yeah you're
totally right and i love that post from
you
that don't post your don't post your
certificates post your projects
yeah it's a it comes off a bit harsh i
mean
i'm i'm proud of you for putting in the
effort to get that certificate but at
the end of the day
show me show me the skills show me the
value show me what you've
learned don't show me the piece of paper
yeah yeah exactly um i love that that's
that's a good
good good point um did have a question
here from a linkedin user
matt which bootcamp did you go to so i
used uh
thinkful um they've kind of diversified
their offerings now
so what i took was i think what they
call the
the flex option now the data science
flex option
uh it's supposedly part-time but
i was doing it full-time um but it's
pretty comparable from what i've seen to
things like springboard and flatiron
are two comparable offerings um
so yeah there there's there's a number
of things that i think you should look
out for
when when if you're looking at the boot
camp option that one that's
kind of one-on-one mentorship um two
you want something that is um
lengthy don't do something like that's
like 10 weeks or something that's
not enough time to gain the skills if
you're coming from essentially zero
you want something that's at least three
or four months
probably like six months i mean it took
me six months to get through the
thinkful bootcamp
and then some career coaching at the end
to help you
revise your resume fix up your linkedin
profile
and get you ready to convey your
specific reasoning
for making the pivot into data science
and and help you
with that narrative from from a to b
yeah that
that's a huge one i see a lot of boot
camps
that will teach you the technical stuff
right um
but they don't teach you the some of uh
the helpful tips in your career building
um
which is which is half the battle you
know um
and and so and they actually go hand in
hand in my opinion
if you can build projects and then put
them in a portfolio
you really increase your resume you
increase your personal brand
it just helps you so much more it no one
wants to talk about a resume but if you
like you talked about earlier you know
oh you did a you know a ted talk
youtube screening and clustering on that
oh
that's interesting tell me more you know
but if but if you just write that as
like a sentence on your resume
or or if you just say hey i learned
clustering um
then it doesn't doesn't really help
falls flat
um yeah okay we had a couple couple
questions we have one here
from sunita how can i learn more about
the bootcamp
um you can check out
datacareerjumpstart.com and sign up for
updates there
um and then if you want to search any of
the flatiron or you could just search
them on google they're they're
they're very good at spending uh ad
dollars for google adsense they
if you if you google data science
bootcamp they'll be at the top guarantee
that but but for mine
uh check out datacareerjumpstart.com um
we also had scott taylor stop by and say
hello
and he was asking about the state of
data science at general mills is it in
good shape matt do we have anything to
worry about
uh no uh thanks for the question scott
um
data science at general mills is uh kind
of booming business right now we are
um i think there's a little bit of a of
a pause but
we are basically uh continuing to to
ramp up
quickly we've got uh a global
kind of data science footprint and we
are our i mean
the project that i'm supporting uh the
the the dollar value on on the
on the investment from the business
during this current process is in the
billions
so any any small improvement in that is
is big big dollars um
and there's a lot of other low-hanging
fruits still left to grab so
we are um rapidly maturing i would say
we've got
kind of an enterprise data organization
of something like 300
350 people uh
the data science is just one one small
component of that but we build out
um you know project teams product teams
to to develop internal solutions and
and help the business uh be more nimble
be more efficient
and uh generate more value for the
shareholder
sweet that's good to hear especially for
my lucky charms that's what i like to
hear
um we had another question from a
linkedin user any thoughts a data
incubator i've never heard of that have
you uh
no is is that a is that boot camp i mean
it's not sure
it's probably some sort of some sort of
boot camp but sorry linkedin user we we
do not know
um but like we said make sure if you're
taking a boot camp
you know it has it has good technical
has what you want to learn
has a good price point and it has career
um
applications or career help i think i
think those are the the big check marks
to have
um okay switching into i mean i guess
we're already here
um but talking about a little bit more
about your career
um what is your biggest what's your
advice to
i guess anyone but specifically
engineers and geoscientists
who want to break into data science
what's your suggestion to them
uh i would ask you if you actually do
want to break into data science
um i mean everybody now
says that they want to do that they want
to be
uh more diversified in their skill set
either to
to expand their their roles and
responsibilities in their current job
title or it is
to pivot into into data but
i think what goes unasked
too often is is like do you actually
want to be a data scientist
um and i and the reason i asked i would
ask that is
data roles are so much more widely
varied than just a data scientist
and it's it's not it's not just data
science
i i mean actually to to be
to be truthful i don't do all that much
data science in my role right now but
i'm a data scientist and job title
and and that's fine it's it's i actually
like what i do
i like how i uh help the business but
you know there's data analysts there's
data engineers
there's um
uh bi visualization experts there's
the the spectrum is huge don't get
narrowed in don't get siloed into
thinking
uh it's data science robust so you know
consider consider a wide options
um in in your roles and that's i mean
the the more that i've have a space
on uh my layoff in 2018
the the more i realized that i was so
focused on being like
i well i went to school as i got a
geology major geology
masters i'm a geologist damn it
um but
that was just tunnel vision and and uh
having your your blinders taken off
seeing the world as your oyster and and
and finding out what you actually want
to do and how
you can best impact a business
or us or people like like you've just
taken off from exxon and started this
consulting business and this boot camp
so
you know don't don't silo yourself is
is my is my main uh my main point there
yeah i think i think that's actually
really interesting you actually brought
it up at the beginning of the podcast
you were like
i labeled myself a geoscientist i was a
geoscientist
and i think sometimes we have the
opposite problem now
where i am not a data scientist so i do
not do data science and that's just
wrong
data science is is for anyone it's for
everyone it's like saying
that mathematicians are the only people
who can do math
it's like no you know business people
use math scientists use math engineers
use math like
for me data science is more of a
mindset than it is a title and i think i
think it often
people just think of it as a title and
not like as a mindset
um so yeah i love that advice
um okay what about advice um separate
from
separate from data just like what's good
career advice that sort of do well in
your career
um well man we got these these questions
mixed up that that was
that was my answer so okay so so let me
let me pivot then
okay if you do want to go into data
science um
you don't need to learn everything all
at once
um you don't need to be an expert in nlp
in deep learning in visualization
you don't need to know every statistical
test there is you don't need to know how
to implement
every single method in sklearn um
you need to do some foundational work to
get yourself up to
what is entry level and what's entry
level at facebook or google
what's talked about most broadly in in
on the internet
um like how to how to crack the code
interview
i would fail all of those interviews all
of the time
um so you can be perfectly
uh valuable to a specific company
without
meeting the mold of of a google data
scientist
yeah uh 100 super true there's different
yeah you don't need to be like the best
data scientist on planet earth
to get a data science into your job but
that's definitely not the case
and you don't have to know ever and know
everything um
i'm like we talked about nlp earlier for
those who don't know
nlp is natural language processing and
it's like machine learning on text like
written text
and i'm not great at it you know i'm not
that good at it
um but it's okay because i data science
like we talked about earlier
you even said there's like okay there's
data analysts there's data engineers
there's visualization experts
there's more roles than just data
science well even data scientists
even just inside the term or the role
data scientist
there's so many different roles that you
could be you could be
a computer vision you know specialist
you can be
an nlp specialist you can be a data
visualization
specialist like there's so many roles
inside of data
science and just the data realm is so
so broad you don't have to know all of
it perfectly if you specialize on one
thing
if you're like the best cloud you know
data scientists there is
you can make such a good living only
being good at one part of data science
that's totally allowed
yep for sure and and and don't just jump
into the
into the industry because you're chasing
the money because it's
there there's more to it than that yes
exactly i i came out with a youtube
video recently that um
oh wait is it not released yet i can't
remember there's five reasons
it's five reasons that you should that
you should want to be a data scientist
and um money i think is number four on
the list like the the pay is good you
know
um but there's other things namely for
me
the ability to be creative and like do
something that i actually really enjoy
um it's just it's just awesome um okay
couple questions or a couple comments
here um we have derek a lesson i found
to be true is ideally you should have a
more specific goal
than be a data scientist totally yeah
pick a time pick an industry you know
maybe not even
maybe maybe you make it a little less
specific too and maybe it's not data
scientists maybe it's have a data career
and
it could be a lot of different things so
i agree with that derek
um also a comment here from dustin the
awesome thing is that
if you identify an opportunity to solve
something and make a decision to care
about it
set out to solve it there are so many
folks that can help in technical areas
where you may not personally have
expertise
definitely true for sure google and
stack overflow
best friends yeah so like have
have have a specific project in mind
like derek's point
and then and then make a decision to
care about it
to dustin's point and then and then
you'll you'll have something
awesome to talk about in your in the
next interview
totally um well awesome thank you matt
this was this was really good advice
i think hopefully everyone listening you
you wrote something down that you're
gonna try
um you know try to follow matt's uh
career even when we were talking i was
thinking
about doing a linkedin post about matt's
you know evolution because he got the
skills
landed a job that utilized his domain
continued to develop the skills where he
no longer needed the domain and then
landed a full data scientist job i think
that's a great path that's very similar
uh to what
what i did um and
yeah i think i think that's that story
is really great i did want to get you
out
out of here on a fun question though and
uh let's let's talk about running matt
you've been running recently
yes i i i picked up uh my running i i
was in a little bit of a lull
had an injury uh some acute tendonitis
after i run the
the houston full marathon in january but
oh wow congrats
now now i'm training for the twin cities
marathon in october
oh nice that's that's awesome how many
marathons have you done
um i guess two
officially for races and then one
i was just running um with some other
buddies
oh that's that's awesome uh i think
that's so cool
i'm i'm trying to get into running and
be like matt um
what what do you feel like well i guess
why do you run i have actually hold on
let me see i have this book i want to
show you i bought this book
it's called i hate running and you can
too yeah how to get started keep going
and make sense of her
irrational passion um so i guess
do you hate running first off and i
guess if you do why do you keep doing it
i i do not hate running i think if you
hate running you should slow down
uh you're probably running too fast um
no so so running is something that i
started in like uh
junior high i was on the cross country
track teams then
um and it's something that's kind of
ebbed and flowed in my adult life but
um i enjoy that
it's simple like you literally just put
on some shoes
put on some shorts and you can be out
the door and and go
go run and and the simple fact that
you doing that is an incremental
step of being better at running so like
i've got
some goals floating around in my head um
like running your specific goals and and
per 80 of of what i need to achieve
those
is is just put on some running shoes
some shorts and go out the door for an
hour and and that's that's all i need
um i mean it's it's super simple
there's complexity that you can add in
different types of workouts and whatnot
but i i love that it's a simple activity
that i can directly track
the progress i make towards my goals
timing myself doing track workouts
whatever um
but it's also a way for me
to show my um
it's not so much motivation but i have
uh
it's now like just part of who i am is
as i sleep in my running shorts i get
out of bed and i go running
right away in the morning um it's it's
habit at this point
um and it's something that that i try
to have as as
i guess sort of a bedrock in my life and
is this is what i do
i could see the progress i make and i
know if i
just you know transfer that kind of
mindset that mentality
into other things that i do i will
incrementally get better so it was the
same thing with data science when i was
studying uh in the boot camp okay
i just have to spend you know eight
hours a day
studying this and i will incrementally
get better and i i could track that
progress by looking at my code from
two weeks before and see how much better
i got i can
and and it's it's like that with any
other skill so
uh running is just a simple application
of stimulus and response and
and you can see that improvement over a
very short period of time
so you think it's helped you in your
life outside of physically
uh it's it's it's a time where i get to
shut off my my mind i actually i don't
have like
i don't usually have an internal
monologue going about how much i hate
running or how
how like how much pain i'm in unless i'm
doing a workout
um but it's so
yes it it helps me clear my mind for you
know an hour a day or whatever
um it also um
you know i want to take those learnings
from
from my habits of running and translate
those into
you know professional life and that's
something i'm working on
i'm i'm less good at it professionally
than i am with running
no that's 100 true um
and i've seen that in my life last year
um
i was trying to figure out what i was
gonna do with my career i was applying
for new jobs
i wasn't happy at exxon i was toying
with this idea of of starting my own
business
um but i was pretty nervous about it
and it just seemed risky and and kind of
hard and so one day
i was in utah at the time uh just just
visiting
at like three o'clock i was like oh my
gosh
um i really wanted to hike this mountain
mount timpanogos
and my trip was coming to an end and i
was like if i don't hike it today i'm
not going to hike it
but the thing about mount tippinogas is
it's like
an hour drive there an hour drive back
and like
a six to seven hour hike and this is at
three o'clock
and i was like okay so two hours of just
driving
five and then like a seven hour hike
that puts me at midnight
and i was like oh my gosh all right i'm
just gonna do it
and so i started at four o'clock and
everyone's walking down and i'm walking
up
um and i got to see the sunset and
like it was super hard and it got really
dark and i hiked the rest of the way
down in the pitch black
uh and it sucked honestly but i survived
and i knew
i knew after doing that i was like you
know what i can do
i can do hard things and i can do
do spontaneous things and i actually
promised myself i was going to start a
business
at the top of the mountain i was so i
totally i understand where you're coming
from
um i love that um i had a quick question
here
from charles what's your 5k 5k time for
cross country
uh unfortunately it's still my my high
school pr is
1836. fast
i uh i should have i was planning on uh
beating that this spring but after i got
injured
running the houston marathon i couldn't
couldn't use that fitness to to do like
an 18 flat
5k or something well man i
i think that's impressive my 5k right
now is like 30 minutes
so maybe maybe maybe i am i am not
running too fast maybe i'm still going
slow well
i mean that the the whole thing with
running is you're
you were always faster than somebody on
the couch true
100 that's 100 true um
anyways awesome matt thank you so much
love talking data with you love talking
running with you
um loved hearing your advice i hope
people
you know do projects they talk about it
they stop
posting their certificates and post
their projects uh
they think about okay do i actually want
to be a data scientist
or am i more interested you know in
business intelligence or
or data engineering and just think about
that a little bit and
and yeah hopefully uh hopefully we can
help some engineers this helps some data
engineers and
uh geoscientists figure out their path a
little bit uh
so thank you so much for joining us on
the data career podcast yeah thanks for
having me ave
ever it's been uh it's been a blast yep
okay
everyone thank you guys so much follow
matt on linkedin
um and yeah look forward to talking to
him again in the future
all right see you guys bye

Title: Data in Augmented Reality? And on TikTok? Chat with Michael DiBenigno

Description: Friday, 2PM ET. Come hear Michael DiBenigno talk about how to visualize data in augmented reality. Enough of those boring dashboards and graphs; if you aren't walking through your data in 3D, you're in the stone age! 

Michael will also talk about his TikTok account where he tells data stories in 3D, and talk about his career a bit.

You don't want to miss this one! 

#BigData #TikTok #AR

Video Transcript:
[Music]
welcome to the data career podcast
here's your host avery smith
hey everyone what's up happy what's
today happy friday
almost the uh end of the week i'm gonna
move my mic a little bit closer so you
can hear me a little bit better
um stoked me with you this friday
afternoon we have
an awesome guest i'm super excited about
it
um basically a celebrity at least if
you're on tick tock
on data tick tock which maybe is a
little a little a little niche
but we have uh i'm gonna pull them up
here there we go we have
michael and i'm gonna say his name wrong
again his last name diben
enyo how do you say it one more time uh
okay there you go yeah is that like
italian or something
it is yes very cool last name
yeah thank you appreciate it um so
anyways
michael's really awesome i have this
quick bio for him
um michael is the head of business at
flow immersive which is a revolutionary
ar
immersive data visualization and
storytelling platform
like i said he's also tick-tock famous
for his awesome short clips on
explaining
data analysis stories in 3d augmented
reality
he has a bachelor's degree from
vanderbilt and then an mba from
mit that mit so that's pretty sweet
uh he's been a consultant at deloitte
helping companies to use tech to drive
value
in the past and he's even led a team to
teach a robot to paint
so michael welcome to the data career
podcast avery thank you so much for
having me
yeah it's super good to be with you if
you guys haven't seen
uh michael's videos or seen flow
immersive yet
um you'll have the chance to today from
what i understand we'll have
a little bit of a demo um but yeah first
let's start there
tell us about flow immersive what
exactly is it and for those who haven't
seen it maybe we can take a look at it
yeah i'll i'll go through just like a
quick overview here of what flow is but
at a very high level you know what we
believe is that
more data is not going to change the
world but more effectively communicating
with the data that we have
is how we start to push society forward
and so that's true both in the
enterprise but also
you know in the public domain the um you
know i think climate change is sort of a
perfect example of that
adding more data into the climate change
repository probably not going to change
things very much
but if we can more effectively
communicate to leaders to influencers
with that
information and the insight of what to
do next that's how we start to push
things forward and so
we see this divide in the world
essentially where
there's a lot of data and we sort of
assume that it's just gonna
a decision just gonna happen but
decisions are still made by people
and they're still convinced and informed
by data
and so that's really what we're trying
to empower and we see that as sort of
the major gap
and so yeah i can go through a little
bit more here
through the screen share so you know
ultimately
what i'm showing you is flow uh so so
the idea you can see my face you can see
that the content at the same time
and this also works into ar and vr
and all of the extending technology so
it's ultimately what we're solving for
sort of three fundamental data
communication problems
one is levels of engagement in a meeting
is your audience actually paying
attention
or are they on their phone doing
something else two is levels of
understanding
do they really understand these mental
models that you're trying to convey
when it has some complexity and then
three is levels of interaction
typically calls and like this it's sort
of one to many i'm presenting out
um but to actually enable people to
interact
with the contents during the meeting
that's how you start to bring people
along
and so by solving for these things we
essentially can help drive better
better data-driven decisions and in a
sales use case more sales conversions
um and so ultimately it's through data
storytelling that we do this
and so data storytelling fills this
niche which is
the um adding a narrative onto data
visualization
so if you think of like powerpoint as
sort of a narrative uh
version and then we can think of tableau
as sort of like the data visualization
it's basically a merging of those two
together
to add the empathy layer of the
narrative with the
visualization layer which is more of the
logical side so it's it's those two
things combined which which
drive data storytelling and so that's
really what we are we're a data
storytelling platform at the at the end
of the day and so
the response and tick tock's been
amazing um and
you know just to illustrate here and
maybe get you involved here
um this was a a map back in
2016 that donald trump would say like
the whole country voted red
and you can see the the distribution
this is a county by county level
uh election results from 2020. and the
county yeah that was that
you know land doesn't vote people though
and so if we adjust the size of these
bars based on the number of votes cast
we see a very different story emerge
and so what i'm going to do that i think
this would be funny for you i'm going to
actually
uh have you join in i didn't prompt you
to prompt you beforehand
but i just put a link into the chat
window and i'm not sure if anyone's
on live but if you actually want to join
on your cell phone if you open the
camera
of your phone and point it to that qr
code you can actually
join this session live oh that is cool
be in here um and i'll actually join on
my phone too just so you can see
see a bit of what this looks like um
yeah so if you're watching
go ahead and uh use your phone hopefully
you're on a computer and you have your
phone
available and scan that qr code and
let's see let's see what happens i'm
joining via
the the special link that michael sent
me
yeah so let me uh
select my username okay avery
all right so cool i'm starting to see
some people join or i see
two people so we got john on a phone and
then avery
there you are so so this idea that we're
in the same scene
and part of the same multi-user meeting
you know this is starting to hint
towards where we're leaning towards
right
so you're seeing all the augmented
reality type stuff that we post online
um but a majority of our customers today
really use sort of more the flat screen
version
so being practical today is really
important to us and so this idea that
you can interact with the data
i'm not sure if you're still in the
scene but if you can you can click
on data points to pull up additional
information
and this idea that we can sort of see
each other in the scene you know it's
empowering to someone that doesn't
necessarily have
deep understanding or expertise on the
data that they can literally just point
to something and ask about it it's a
very empowering thing
so that's sort of hinting towards what
we're what we're you know building
towards and
and some of the interaction models that
you might not see um on sort of the
the post that we uh or some of the posts
i put on tick tock and things like that
uh but yeah we'd love to get your your
take and questions you have from this
okay i had to put my my camera back on
the
stream because i am blown away this is
really cool
um this is insane guys for everyone
who's
who's not in there
oh still there
i clicked the wrong button i'm back can
you hear me yeah i can hear you uh-huh
okay sorry everyone okay
i clicked the wrong button this is this
is really cool um
like this is this is crazy where it's
like
i can see where your mouse is going and
what you're looking at
inside of the data full screen um
and like there can be multiple people
there and even just like
even when you were just presenting um
just the fact that you have
like the data behind you and your face
there
that's like i mean powerpoint should
have that any sort of
presentation tool should have that um
but to have that with data
i think is really interesting because it
becomes it also becomes
i mean this is what you said earlier
you're combining something like tableau
and powerpoints together but it also
becomes a point where it's like
oh i can actually do analysis with the
person in the room like it's not like a
static graph if they have a question
we can go and answer it yeah it's a bit
exploratory you can explore the content
together and
and and find some of those insights um i
do think the majority of the use cases
we're releasing today
it's more directed where it's a story
that someone
has planned already that they're
presenting upwards to executives or
outwards to a larger audience but we
definitely have
other features that we're pushing that
are a little bit more exploratory
that allow sort of that exploration of
data during the meeting
um so so yeah you're getting i'm sort of
giving you a
a lot of like little pieces that you
probably didn't see online um
because i think that the ar aspect is
really cool
you know there's a cool aspect to it and
my business partner
you know has this great quote when he
talks about cool he says
cool is like a technical term and it
means mastering control
so if you think about like the a cool
skateboard trick
or bmw it's about feeling that that
sense of control and confidence and
mastery over something
and so when you're in ar and you're
actually moving around and you feel this
mastery of the content around you
it's sort of you know the name flow is
actually about
you know being in the state of flow
you're sort of in this
altered state where your your um your
mental capacity is peaked
and um and yeah so that that's sort of a
little bit more of the the ethos
of what we're after in some sense um so
so yeah anyways i think uh
i always think it's funny that he tries
to codify cool as
a technical term uh but i think there is
some truth to it in terms of
um you know what we're what we're really
trying to enable and trying to decipher
what people really mean when they see
the
the cool ar visualizations and why they
why it clicks with them
you know i think our mental models are
3d in in nature
and we sort of have have forced
ourselves to think in two dimensions
and when you reactivate it it really
does codify in your mind in a very
different way i guarantee this map that
i'm
you know showing you here that you're
gonna that visual is gonna stick with
you in an interesting way
where your understanding of the globe
and your understanding of the
information
it sticks in a very different way and
especially when it's in arvr where it's
actually in the room with you
is pretty powerful so yeah anyways i'll
stop there and there's lots of other
visualizations we can go through i've
no no shortage of visualizations
we could talk through which could be fun
well i think it's i think it's
fascinating because
um you know we have been stuck
um one of my heroes uh is edward tufte
he's kind of the the godfather
of data visualization yes i have i guess
i have i don't have his new book but i
have his four other books sitting right
there on my shelf
and she has this you know this term that
he talks about
called flatland and that's what we're
stuck in when we've done data
visualization and he's talking about two
dimensions
um and he's he's a big fan or i guess
he's what's the opposite of a fan he's
not a big fan
of 3d data visualizations because they
often are very confusing and they don't
add anything really
right but but that's 3d
being projected on to 2d like a piece of
paper or a monitor
but what you're doing with flow
immersive is you're kind of making
you're making a comeback for 3d plots
yeah a little bit
yeah yeah it's uh it's a very
controversial topic so it's almost i
find that more people are ingrained in
sort of traditional database the more
immediate the reaction of like oh i
don't want that i don't want that but
what's interesting is especially when
you're in arvr and the tech is in
essentially three dimensions already
you're
by looking at 2d content in a 3d
environment
it sort of defeats the purpose and
sometimes it actually feels way more
intuitive when it's all around you
in a 3d sense but i do agree that you
know presenting things onto a flat
screen
like this like what i'm doing here and
what a majority of you know our
customers
typically do doing 3d just for the sake
of 3d
is not valuable you know geospatial is a
very easy one to understand in terms of
the value add you can do here
but i think there's other elements to
like storytelling you know one is like
looking at like this is a network graph
of
uh of a reproduction value for for covid
and this is sort of the mathematical
model
of how disease propagates and anyways i
can go further on this
on this topic but um this idea that
you know what are you gaining from the
third dimension
and i think it's it's an element to
allowing more
space so you have literally more space
to put things
but there's also elements of
storytelling you know the idea that you
can animate things over time
that you can move the camera you know
all these elements play together so it's
not
just the 3d that we're doing it's really
that in combination with all these
different storytelling mechanics
that really bring the story to life so i
think of it that way as opposed to uh
you know the the 3d is the only thing
we're adding
i think 3d adds value in many cases but
there are definitely instances where
you know 2d visualization is actually
preferred um
and i think that is fine um and it's a
little bit more about some of the
storytelling techniques that also play a
big role in there
yeah um i think that's definitely true
because data visualization and
communication
and storytelling go hand in hand and i'm
glad i'm glad that you showed me
so i mean for everyone who didn't know i
found michael through his tick tocks
and his tick tocks most of the time are
like augmented reality 3d walking in
data
and i was like oh that's really cool but
one of the questions is like okay when
would i use that like when do i want to
walk through the data i do agree that
network
charts i think are a good example um i
think when you're doing some sort of
uh dimensionality reduction like pca
or any sort of clustering i could see
myself using it yeah but
i didn't realize that flow had this
other component of like the powerpoint
style um like more fluid
uh storytelling um that's another thing
that that tufty talks about is
he he talks about his disdain for
powerpoint um
oh yeah and how it's not effective and i
just think flow
seems like a really good solution for
that yeah absolutely thanks senate i
totally agree and you know one element
here let me just show one example of uh
yes please do you know something where
there's sort of like a 3d
element to it um and you know where it
adds value so here what we're looking at
is total capacity so hold on one second
one second
i'm sorry to interrupt you i just want
to tell you i was in texas
i lived in texas when this happened this
is this is close to home
yeah it was we were like three days
without power it was miserable so sorry
keep going just have to throw no
it's yeah i feel like the story just
passed a bit
and i'm still anyways i i still think
there's so much more to
talk about but but one of the things and
this is more on just like the elements
of like the the 3d nature
you know what we can do here is build a
graph that is showing the component
parts
of the hole and being able to show it
step wise like this
now normally you could put this all
together or show it as a stacked bar
chart
stack bar charts don't quite hold up as
well when you want to look at
individual contributions yeah so you
know this is sort of a
somewhat of a unique view and i can show
you lots of others that that really are
unique in the 3d space that we're always
experimenting with
but in many regards it's sort of a um an
open territory
where we really haven't focused that
much on what this can enable
but you know this is just one example of
seeing the breakdown in this case the
breakdown of
uh power generation and the different
component parts of it
and then how each of those have either
increased or decreased over time
um or not over time but within this time
period during the the
power outage so obviously i'm not
telling the whole story here there's a
there's a lot more to it that i think is
really
really interesting are you clicking a
button or how is it transitioning
uh yeah i'm just clicking i'm clicking
the next button um
it's just down here it has that nice
gradual flow
yeah so there's always animations
between steps
um i can actually show you how we build
these because one of the big things
that's
we've been really pushing hard on and
why i'm not posting
videos as often is because we're really
working on the product and the tool
to allow anyone to build these
themselves um and so
that's been a huge undertaking and we're
really excited about the response you
know we have a waitlist that's
of people wanting wanting to get into
the platform and so we're going to be
starting bringing
a few a few private beta users in july
6th
and then from there in a few months uh
planning mid-september sort of a larger
public release
but we're really excited to see where
people can start to take the platform
and the different stories that this
starts to enable
um you know i think my goal is not for
me to be sort of the only
you know data guy on tic tac but to see
a lot of people starting to post this
type of content and starting to engage
with data sort of a
core elements so that's the ultimate
dream is where there's lots of
lots of data guys and gals and and
everyone doing uh you know
visualizations and really
having conversations around data and i
think it's in some sense covid was
actually sort of a
huge catalyst for data visualization
you know it's not too often where too
many times in our life where
you know the president's like just
holding up you know pieces of paper with
with data visualizations on them and
even if he was interpreting them in
different ways the uh yeah just this
idea that it was part of our
consciousness because we wanted to know
what was going on and we realized that
the data was the way to understand
what was actually going on versus sort
of the antidotal
you know stories that you'd hear i think
sort of the antidotes dead in some sense
and the data's there to help you
fill in sort of a larger picture can you
imagine
uh seeing a president in one of those
like just like you just did like
presenting with data behind them and
and showing them that would be cool
that's i guess that's the next step for
flow huh
yeah you know some of our biggest one of
our biggest customers is the united
nations
so we actually were part of our software
was used last year for
uh the general assembly for a portion of
it which was really amazing it was just
the incredible moment very stressful but
very
very important uh to be able to be part
of that so
you know it's um yeah so so definitely
applicable there
um without a doubt so and um
where where can people go to learn more
is it flow immersive.com is that the
best place to go
that is the best place to go yes so
you'll you'll see uh sign up lists there
for the waitlist see videos and you can
actually interact with all of these
flows they're public um
on our our website so you can actually
go there and interact with them you can
actually even host a meeting with them
so you could actually do exactly what i
did where you can host a meeting and go
through it
most of them have just like an invite
button on the lower left hand side and
that's how you essentially start
start one of these visualizations um
yeah
and uh yeah so i can try to think where
that where to go here
part of me wants to show you this
experimental one i built that
i don't think people are really seen or
i haven't i haven't published it really
ooh i think it's
i think it's pretty sweet yeah let's
look at it
just active again
yeah i want early access michael i need
to yeah
yeah because yeah very sweet
thanks um
let's see
i could i could almost saying be see
this being
as revolutionary as as like tableau
just because i mean when tableau came
out it just gave data visualization
powers i don't know and also i guess i
shouldn't say tableau i should just say
drag and drop
graph making that's not basically excel
um just
just just easy graph making um just
because i think
what tableau did for
dashboards and mostly dashboards because
they don't even
most people don't even do standard or
just standalone data visualization on
tableau
i think you guys could do for data
stories because it definitely has
i'm going to use the the title again
definitely has more flow
than tableau tableau if you want to
change the narrative
or change the story you're clicking down
onto like a new tab and it's like a
it's a hard um it's a hard change but
you guys have that soft transition
anyways i think it could be really cool
yeah no i totally agree with you and i
think they
you know in some sense they pioneered
sort of not pioneered but they
uh exemplified this idea of more data
analysis and we think of it i think of
it more in terms of exploration
and analysis you build these dashboards
which people can go in and explore and
find insights
but what we found is that there's a
missing component there people publish
dashboards
and then the person that actually wanted
the dashboard realizes they didn't
actually want a dashboard what they
wanted was someone to give them the
answer yeah the commentary
analysis and then present back to them
not a dashboard so
i think in some sense dashboards
actually have sort of proven out to be
not ideal forms of communication they're
great for analysis and if you're
operational and doing something every
day
totally but if you need to present
insights or tell a story
sending someone a dashboard and hoping
they figure it out themselves
i mean sort of like good luck and i
think the other thing is i sort of
i um i ran into this way often
in the consulting world was uh copying
and pasting screenshots of tableau
powerpoint and then circling and adding
annotations and yes yeah it just feels
very like there's got to be a better way
right and that's that's i think a huge
element to it so i'm glad you're sort of
seeing that
that component because i think you know
the analysis portion is
hugely valuable and i think that the
missing element was really the
storytelling component and that's
that's that gap that we're hoping to to
fill um
so yeah that's really cool you have a
codified idea good so let me i'm going
to show you this real quick
um let's see um okay
we did have a comment that i like it's
like tableau with flow
it rhymes even i like that that's pretty
good yeah
the uh okay so what we're looking at
here is
a 24 hour clock so so just focus on the
the circle at first here and so you'll
see this is midnight this is noon so
we're going around the clock
um so basically you can think of this as
almost like a time
passing as it as it goes by that we're
seeing time pass and so
the other axis here is number of days so
this is a seven week period
um and this is we had a i had my first
child here
early january and so we we tracked all
of the
the bottle feeds diaper changes
breastfeeding sessions
and uh graphed it and so when you look
at it like this
i feel like i don't know i've never seen
one
i was experimenting with this idea of
using polar coordinates but also
having some animation and it you know it
reminds me of the uh
you know those little like uh toy boxes
with like a ballerina or like little
music boxes
with the piano player it sort of reminds
me of that but the big difference is
that this
is you know chronological over time but
you can really sort of see the
you know i guess in some sense the
never-ending
uh onslaught of baby management during
the day
without periods of sleep here and this
is the pink the yellow is when i started
to intervene here
and uh allowed my my partner to get more
more sleep
but um but anyways you know i just
wanted to share that because i haven't
shown
i haven't shown this that's cool for the
rotating like
this view but i feel like there's yeah
anyways
that's what i mean when i say like it's
sort of it's a very untapped space
in terms of the potential to tell
stories and while i think there's things
i could improve on this
exponentially that you know i feel like
this is starting to at least in my mind
it it allows you to interpret and see
insights in a different way and
communicate those insights in a new way
and
you know if anything testament to that
is not
me but more like tick-tock and seeing
people's response to these
videos because it seems like things are
clicking in a different way
whereas if i just posted it you know a
presentation online or
you know uh you know images of data
visualizations it doesn't have that same
impact and so
so yeah that's that's really what we're
what we're about well i
i think that was awesome thank you for
sharing that you're welcome
it's actually cool i had um so i run an
analytics firm
um as well and one of my first projects
in my analytics firm
was to visualize baby data
yeah yeah and uh so i wish i wish uh
yeah i definitely did not make that type
of graph i'll tell you that much
um but that that was really cool uh
thank you for
for showing that all right um i know you
gotta get out of here in a little bit
um i did want to ask you just a quick
question so this is this is this is the
data career podcast we talk about data
another thing we talk about is careers
so i think we learned a lot about flow
immersive if you're watching
um definitely definitely check out flow
immersive especially in
a business standpoint um but just talk a
little bit more about you
and i guess specifically the tick tock
which is interesting um is
why like tell me about the first time
you posted on tick tock one of these
videos why did you do it
um a little bit just experimental i
i i was i think like everyone sort of
like was fascinated with tick tock in
the beginning
and i loved it i just think it's an
amazing platform because it is
it gives people the chance to to break
out
whereas other platforms are very
dependent on your following
yeah like you know twitter and it's like
you if you don't have an established
following that you've been building over
years
if you post something and it's great
sort of the world doesn't matter it
doesn't care too much
whereas tic tocs algorithm really
prioritizes contents you know
high quality content will has the
potential to go viral ones there's not
too many platforms that
really allow that anymore so i think
that's one component but you know the
interaction the app it's
there's so many fascinating things and i
feel like the most creative things i've
ever seen in my life seem to always come
from this app
and that's crazy right i mean i feel
like i'm learning more from this
tigs app that i you know did through all
this professional schooling sometimes
uh you know it's just i think it's an
amazing thing and i think
the more we embrace these new
technologies and how we communicate
the better so so i'm always one that
embraces and tries new things and
i was really shocked to see a big
response on you know one of my ar videos
and
you know i've been i was building that
one i posted that i think was andrew
yang one that was the first one that
like went
went a little viral um you know i built
that like a year before
and oh wow and uh not really
you know i posted it on twitter and a
few other you know it's just some things
like that but
you know just the the response on tiktok
was really amazing i think
part of it is the the platform itself
but um
yeah it's been fun to lean into it and
just try to try to keep
posting more and build that community
but i'm most excited for really getting
more people in
and seeing other other creators start to
to build data visualizations and more
importantly data stories that are
important to them
yeah for sure that'll be that'll be so
cool yeah um
did i hear you say that you've learned
more from tick tock than some of your
education
including mit you went to mit michael do
you learn more from tick tock than mit
just just say yes or no
uh i can't i can't answer that
unfortunately
um yeah i mean it's it's definitely
different but i feel like yeah
it's yeah very different you know but um
yeah i mean on the on the career side of
things you know just to segue more into
that
you know i feel like my i feel like i'm
in some sense
almost part of the last generation to
really emphasize
schooling credentials which i'm hopeful
of especially because i just had a kid
and i'm hoping
that by the time she gets to college
it's not as much of like a
uh do you have this rubber stamp of
approval having gone to like a
you know to a really top school and and
essentially i think that's more of what
it's become it's become social proof of
like oh you have the capabilities
and i think more so especially in tech
it's way more about what have you
delivered
and what can you deliver and if you can
prove that then
the schooling and education is just like
a component and it we used to
weed people out that way as a way to
filter incoming but
you know if you have a portfolio online
if you have a following all these other
attributes
you know that's that's i think more of
the metric by which we
assess people and will be in the future
and i mean there's always going to be a
tie back to formal education and i'm not
against it but i think
you know over emphasizing the the name
brands i think sometimes dilutes
people's real capabilities
and and so i encourage anyone no matter
where they are it's like if you are a
self-learner
you know and have drive in some sense i
think sometimes college
doesn't necessarily prepare you for the
specific tasks you're going to do
if anything it just is a challenge to
say can you
learn can you learn and do you have the
confidence that you can figure it out
and that confidence then will translate
into anything you go into
so that's more of my perspective i guess
on on a little bit of university and
no i i totally agree with you um what
you said
100 resonates with me um i'm currently
um so i make i make education i do
online courses and so i'm coming out
with a big online course
called data career jump start and the
whole point is it's supposed to replace
the master's degree i got but but the
whole time
you're it teaches you technical things
so it teaches you like sql and r
and python and stuff like that but
there's a whole second half of it that's
the personal brand
and that's because they should go hand
in hand now while college has just you
know taught you some of the technical
stuff but like you said
if you have skills and you can
demonstrate them on an online portfolio
yeah their employers don't care anymore
it's like you just need some sort of
proof that you can do the things
that you say you can and if you can for
instance if you can create if you're if
you're applying for a data visualization
job
and you have you know some sort of
portfolio on flow immersive like look at
these
data stories i created and then told
that's so much more powerful
than a one-page diploma from university
of florida or something like that right
totally 100 and it's and i think that
communication component is getting more
and more emphasized these days
because just the ability to build a data
visualization is somewhat
like a not anyone can do it but
the idea that that's not necessarily the
hard part but if you have the ability to
communicate outwards
that's gonna be super valuable uh not
only to yourself but to anyone you're
working for so so yeah i think that's
sort of the this
trend in data science uh data in general
it's like moving towards data
storytelling
um and yeah that's definitely for the
better well that's where the value comes
from like you said the world doesn't
need more data
the world needs more clearly
communicated insights that's what
actually makes a difference
yes in the business world okay well
we'll get you out on this last question
um you can you can say whatever you want
what career advice would you give to
others
what career advice would it give to
others
um
think about this so this is going to be
a
boring answer but i think it's i think
it's somewhat of an underlying
philosophy for how i've
gone about my life is that i always
think about
risk reward i guess in terms of
there's certain moments in your life
where you don't have as many
responsibilities and you have
more appetite for risk and to embrace
that risk
um but you know shoot how do i phrase
this
um
okay this is not eloquently excited but
i'm i'm like sort of thinking on the fly
here
i'm excited the um
i feel like too often you know like
right after college or sort of that
that time frame there's definitely a lot
of experimentation people are trying
things you take a lot of risk
but at the same time if you have the
ability to establish yourself at
you know a big organization or something
where you have the ability to learn more
of like how the real world actually
works
i do think that is extremely valuable
and then sets you up for success that
you can always back
you can always go back to it and so in
some sense i
i've structured a lot of my life as like
i'm learning i'm learning and i'm
building sort of this foundation
that if my ventures and all these things
that i'm i'm trying to do
all go put that i sort of have a safety
net and
i think that's normally not a great
thing to do or i've heard sort of mixed
feelings but i guess that's been one
thing i've
accepted is yeah that i wanted to have
like at least a baseline layer and then
feel comfortable taking risks and really
going all in because it's a
long track like we've been working on
this for you know four or five like
a long time and it hasn't been
successful
right you know the joke is that's uh you
know you wake up and work every day for
like three years to then
be an overnight success yeah it's
totally true because it's
it's a lot of you know struggle and
uh you have to get through that and um
it's not going to be a quick win so
so recognize that when you take a risk
feel like dive all in and put all your
into it but
feel confident that you can spend the
necessary amount of time to do it so
i know my answer was sort of all over
the place there and so maybe that's not
the best advice no
no i love it i love it take risks but
have a plan b that if it fails
you know that you're gonna survive i
like it yeah and maybe that's more just
my perspective
it's more of like i feel more
comfortable taking lots of risk and
for a committed period of time when
because i know i have
some sort of like skill base and
something not to fall back on but but
that i can
leverage and so yeah take a risk but
don't don't just like think oh i'm gonna
start a startup and
and that's gonna be the thing i do and
and uh
yeah anyways no i love it always have
always have an escape route
and and drive defensively in your career
i love it that's
that's great all right well awesome
thank you so much michael
i really appreciate talking to you um
really loved seeing more about flow
immersive like i said i'm excited i want
to try it out
um once again a reminder to everyone to
go to
flowimersive.com and click what does it
say it says sign up for beta
something like that right yeah i think
there's like a uh grabbing
early access yeah earlier grab an invite
yeah
yep so check it out guys i'd recommend
it thank you so much michael appreciate
you coming on
yeah thanks so much for having me we'll
definitely get you in on this uh
this early private beta and we'll love
to get you
yeah get your feedback and um yeah see
what you start building yeah man i'm
gonna be the data guy
too on tick tock i like it
all right talk to you later thank you
everyone who's watching appreciate you
guys see you later all right bye

Title: Ask Me Anything | June 22, 2021

Description: Have a data or career question? Ask me :)

Video Transcript:
what's up how are you guys doing happy
tuesday
it is that time of the week again it is
time for the
ask avery show i hope you guys can all
hear me i hope you guys can all see me
whether you're watching on
youtube twitch or linkedin hello
happy tuesday night to all of y'all or
wherever you are whatever time it is
happy
happy happy happy everything um
once again it's the askgaver show where
you can ask me any questions you want
about data data science data analytics
linkedin building a personal brand
careers stocks
running whatever anything is free game
feel free to ask me
anything you'd like we were supposed to
have one guest today
but i'm not sure i never really heard
back from them they signed up for a spot
but i never really heard back so we have
a free free slot if you want to be
uh on the show go ahead and just type in
the comments
i want to be on the show all right let's
just make it let's just make it an i
just type in i and i'll send you guys
the link to pop on and ask any questions
you want
if you're a little camera shy or can't
be on the camera right now
no problem you can just go ahead and
throw any sort of
question into the comments okay
sound good sound like a plan sounds good
to me
so first i want to make sure i know
everyone's who's watching
say hello say hi um so i know that
you're watching know that you're here
um but we're gonna get right into it
once again open show today if you have
any questions
feel free to type them in the chat or
type the
letter i into the comments and that will
signify to me that i'm going to send you
i'll send it on linkedin messaging um a
link to hop
on camera and talk face-to-face with me
sound good
all right in the meantime while i'm
waiting for some questions or maybe
waiting
for our guest i'm gonna actually talk
about something i posted about
on linkedin this week and that was how
to improve your resume
in five uh five
quick steps um got some people watching
wanted to say hello to
we got dustin hey dustin how's it going
hope you're doing well dustin's been
doing some cool things with some sports
analytics and data visualization
recently
uh i'm sorry if i say your name wrong
makua that's a very cool name um
says hello another one i might get wrong
hemalantha hello hope you're doing well
and we got a question here from ron any
update on the classes that you're going
to be doing
and yeah i've been working on it a lot
let me um let me actually
i'll share my screen with you guys hold
on here we go
sorry for people who are listening to
this as a podcast i will try to describe
this the best i can
we got joe here what's up how you doing
hope you're doing well we're going to
meet up in person here pretty soon
robert hey we're just stopping to say hi
i can't stay long homework tonight oh
that's the worst robert
thanks uh thanks for for stopping by and
good luck with your homework hope it
goes well
i always encounter robert say hello um
okay
uh i was taking on ron's question real
fast
about the classes that i'm going to be
doing so
let me um share my screen here
share a screen we got zahar
from seattle i love seattle one of my
favorite cities to visit
been there a couple times um okay so if
you go to
datacareerjumpstart.com
right um this is some of this is
basically my new boot camp that i'm
putting out
that basically teaches you how to build
a personal brand and how to do data
science
at the same time because i think they
actually go hand in hand
really really well and of course there's
a lot of places where you can learn
about data science already on the
internet
um but what makes this different well
one it's taught hand-in-hand with career
skills like i said building that
personal brand
so a lot of time you have courses that
will teach the technical they'll teach
you python
they'll teach you sql but they won't
teach you how to do interviews or they
won't teach you
how to build a presence or build an
online portfolio and so
uh this uh this course really goes hand
in hand it teaches you how to
have a personal brand build the online
portfolio and all the technical skills
um we could actually scroll down and it
shows it here right this is kind of
what's in the course
data analysis personal brand okay so
technical
more soft skills programming right
technical portfolio soft skills
machine learning technical right how do
i use machine learning at my job career
how do i land my
my dream job so there's kind of a
combination
of technical and soft skills which i
think is going to make the course
very very unique the other thing that uh
makes it very unique and you can kind of
see it um
in well you can't really see that that
logo very big can you
that says personal projects personal
practical projects
okay so the other thing that's really
cool about this course
is instead of doing data on something
like
uh the titanic data set
or the boston housing data set or just
like
any sort of random data set like that's
big in the data community
we're actually going to be doing it on
your data so they're all personal
projects
super practical to your life so it's
like we we want out
at work we want to be making data-driven
decisions
then we go home and we're like uh i'm
just going to do whatever
but no i mean we love data we're data
people we we want to make data-driven
decisions we want to make the best
decisions
and so we're going to use data in our
daily lives to help make those decisions
and so for instance the projects are
going to be
all based off of your data and projects
that help you in your life
so we have a project about screen time
how much time you're spending on your
phone
we have a project on fitness kind of
some of your
calories burnt and your workouts um we
have a
project on what type of music you listen
to um
so it's it's really unique i think i
don't see
anything like this on the market it's
going to combine
technical with the soft skills using
your personal data to build an awesome
portfolio it's going to be a lot of fun
um so
progress i'm going to go ahead i'm the
only one that has access to the course
right now
i'm gonna go ahead and go to the login
page oh and do i remember my password
oh guys i don't remember my password
hold on one second
i like have like this crazy password for
it so none of you guys can hack in
and get a sneak peek you guys aren't
supposed to know
you guys can't look at it yet but i'm
giving you guys a sneak peek right here
hold on give me a second
data career jump start
let's see um you're new graded
career jumpstart okay here's my crazy
password that doesn't make any sense
paste it here i'm gonna click that
remember me
all right ron sorry this is kind of a
lengthy lengthy answer i'm gonna make
i'm gonna make this big again
all right so here's inside of the course
um there's two parts of the course
there's first off
the actual course and then there's the
community which is going to be really
special because you're going to be with
these like-minded peers that really want
to learn about data
um so you're going to go open
and like i said i'm not done yet not
even close
but here's the course intro um here's
some of the contents
five reasons you should have a data
career um
cheating the system how i'm gonna teach
you to cheat the system
instead of doing uh like two years of a
master's
or four years of a phd to become a data
scientist how we can do it a lot quick
more quickly by using projects um i did
i just wanted
to say hi from uh ben taylor hi from
delta at 35
000 feet on my way to san francisco i
mean that's pretty cool
hi ben i thought i saw ben i saw ben's
doppelganger at the airport the other
day
it was so crazy i thought it was him for
sure um on sunday i was there
um anyways um and then i talk about
portfolios
right that's a key part of this of this
project of this
bootcamp is your portfolios so i'll talk
about your portfolio i talk about my
portfolio
etc etc and then here is the first
module that's going to be
on screen time so anyways to answer
ron's question
it is i'm working on it it's coming out
in mid-august that's the hope
um i really think it's going to be
pretty special and pretty exciting
so i hope you guys are all really
excited about it
all right back to some questions here i
saw we had a question up here
from sarvando sarvando what's good hi i
have a quick question i'm about to
graduate with information
systems degree will be enough for a data
analyst slash
engineering position that is a good
question
cervando so basically you're asking
is an is degree enough to get it into a
data analyst
or a data engineering role and that's
the interesting thing
about you know data analysts and data
engineers and data scientists
is there's not like a degree that
necessarily matches up to it right
if i want to be a chemical engineer what
degree do i get chemical engineering
if i want to be a mechanical engineer
what degree do i get mechanical
engineering
there's not like a data analyst degree
or data scientist degree or data
engineering degree
so it's kind of degree agnostic to a way
and a lot of the skills that you end up
learning you're learning outside of
college
um i do know some colleges are coming up
with like i know byu idaho for instance
has a data science
undergraduate degree now um so some some
schools are coming out the undergraduate
degree specifically in data science data
engineering
but for the most part you're learning
those skills outside of college either
in a course
or most the time on job training or you
just learn as you go that's the thing is
the internet
has so much information about this you
can learn as you go
and the idea the ideal is to get paid to
learn
so land a position and learn on the job
that is the best
thing that you can do to you know to
learn just get paid to learn that is the
goal
um so is is good
for data analyst or data engineering
rules
well sir vondo and if you're still here
uh i would love for you to respond
what did you learn in that degree what
type of skills did you learn
did you learn coding i'm sure you did in
some way did you focus on networking
did you learn python did you learn
javascript did you learn
sql because it kind of depends on some
of the skills you have
because basically employers just want
you to
prove that you can do the tasks they
might give you
so if they do a lot of sql a lot of like
data munching
data cleaning data storage they want you
to be good at sql
and if you learn that in your is degree
or you just know that from
you know maybe a job or an online course
you've taken it doesn't really matter
what your degree is as long as you know
sql you're good
um and can you prove it to them do you
have a project
um so i think is
is a good degree as long as you have the
skills if you're going to be a data
analyst
you would know oh yeah right here
surroundo says sql python r
and some java mostly yeah that's that's
a great start
especially for a data analyst um data
analysts are typically
uh you know they're dipping their
fingers in python and r
but not too much not doing too much
predictive analytics and doing a lot of
descriptive analytics
which is like stats right so maybe anova
hypothesis testing a lot of descriptive
analytics in terms of data visualization
so cervantes something you might want to
add in order to be a competitive data
analyst
is power bi tableau google data studio
some sort of business intelligence
dashboarding solution
which they're super easy to learn
they're drag and drop but
you know learn one or two of those just
just barely just enough to put on your
resume
that would make you a good candidate as
an analyst um in terms of data
engineering i am less familiar with data
engineering i've never
really tried to have a data engineering
job on purpose
i'm not a huge fan of it it's really
hard and it requires a little bit more
i think more technical skills and more
cs
savvy skills so if you're really good at
sql i think you're
you have a good chance to to do well as
a data engineer
and if you know cloud computing at all
did you did you do any sort of public
cloud computing you know aws
uh google cloud platform uh azure
if you have any of those skills that's
very useful as a data engineer
and then of course some of the the big
data solutions spark scala
uh hive hadoop um those types of things
make you a good data engineer
i'm less i'm not a good data engineer
and of course the the lines between data
scientists data analyst and data
engineer
all overlap and ebb and flow but as a
data scientist who dabbles in data
engineering i do a poor job to be
perfectly honest
i wish i was better at it but yeah so
hopefully that answers your question
i definitely think savondo that you
could get
a a job as data atlantis or a data
engineer
but you need to have good projects so
you know like we talked about with ron
talking about
my bootcamp it's all project based i
want to have an online portfolio for
everyone who's applying to every job
and they have five projects and they say
hey look i've done this
oh you want to know that i've done sql
we'll check out this project i did that
matches your industry problem very well
i i think it's less about your degree
and more about your skills
and not only what skills do you have but
how do you showcase them
which i think is done best through
projects and portfolios
hopefully that answers your question
appreciate the question
um i did see we had uh two other people
that said hi
merwa hi from paris how you doing merwa
and then we have uh nathan
um from sweden big fan
are you are you swedish are you just
doing just are you doing school there
i know a lot of people do school in
sweden but do you live in sweden
um if so hey herrera my day
go to bra i speak a little swedish
actually i speak a lot of swedish i
lived there for two years so
picked up quite a bit all right question
here from
victor hey avery could you tell us what
was going on in your head and how did
you feel
about going from chemical engineering to
data also how did
how do i know if i have the necessary
skills to join a master's in data coming
from chemical engineering
okay so there's two questions here
victor thank you for your question i
appreciate it
um how did i feel transitioning from
chemical engineering to data
well first my situation might be a
little bit more
more unique because i basically
discovered data and data science when i
was a freshman in college
and uh even though i didn't get into it
directly as a freshman in college
uh by my sophomore year i had been
exposed to programming
you know by my freshman year i've been
exposed to programming i knew i really
liked programming
um and for some reason in high school i
was like oh yeah i like chemistry i like
math so i'm going to be a chemical
engineer
but halfway through my sophomore year or
even early into my sophomore year
i knew i hated chemical engineering i
knew chemical engineering was not for me
it was just not my cup of tea i did not
like the homework i did not like the
classes
um i liked a few of them but like the
the ones that are core core to chemical
engineering
uh like thermo thermodynamics kinetics
process process safety all those classes
i hated
so i knew pretty early in my career that
chemical engineering wasn't for me
i did like some aspects but like what
you would consider
a traditional chemical engineer i was
never going to be able to do that
so i had a choice i was like a sophomore
in college
i'd already done freshman year chemical
engineering maybe half a sophomore year
i had a choice the choice was
what major do i go to but like i just
talked about with cervando
it doesn't really matter what major you
you go into for for data science
i knew i wanted to become a data
scientist um
i didn't really necessarily know the
title and i didn't really know the path
to get there
but i knew there was no data science
degree so i had basically a choice do i
want to switch my major to statistics
do i want to switch my major to computer
science
but the computer science degree required
you took this class where you like
programmed
excel and i didn't want to make software
i was never interested in making
software
i wanted to utilize programming to solve
problems
but not make not make software so i had
a choice do i switch my major into
something that i don't even know about
or do i stay with chemical engineering
if i switch my major it's probably going
to take me an extra year to graduate
or i could get a master's degree after
school and that would take me about a
year
two so that's what i decided is that i
was gonna basically do
uh instead of doing an extra year of
undergraduate i would do an extra year
of graduate school
so from my sophomore year on i knew i
was gonna do chemical engineering
i always knew that i was gonna do some
sort of graduate school
that involved more programming and more
data and more math
so that's kind of a hard question
because i always knew that i was going
to switch
i never wanted to stay necessarily my
first job at
exxon mobil was like half chemical
engineering
maybe a maybe a sixth chemical
engineering
um they hire chemical engineers into
that role and you have to know some
chemical engineering know-how
um but i never worked as like a process
engineer in the field
never i would have died i couldn't do it
um so that was kind of what's going on
in my head um
but also i mean i i guess to describe
what
more of my feelings i knew i didn't want
to work in a plant
i wanted to work from an office i wanted
to work remotely i wanted to spend time
with my family i wanted to go on
vacation
i wanted to get paid a lot that was that
was a that was a big goal um i knew data
science checked those boxes
um i just i wanted to create things and
chemical engineers
it's not as often as you create software
is easier to create
sorry i just said i don't like to create
software but you get the idea
programming is easier to create things
than it is
chemistry right i worked as a lab
technician my freshman year
and you make one mistake in a experiment
it takes you like four hours to figure
out you made the mistake and you have to
repeat the miss
the real experiment in software
development and programming
you make one mistake you find out 30
seconds later you rerun it
30 seconds later and it works and i love
the iterative process of that
so that was kind of what's going on in
my head when i was transferring
how do you know if you have the
necessary skills to join a master's in
data coming from an engineering
background
well first off you do engineers make
great data scientists great data
analysts great data engineers
because you have an incredible technical
background and
that there's like a venn diagram that
they show of data science it's domain
knowledge which you have as an engineer
it is computer science which you may not
have a whole lot of but the next one is
mathematics
and engineers have great mathematics
background most of the time you've taken
calculus
you've taken uh engineering sorry you've
taken calculus you've taken linear
algebra
uh you may have taken like differential
equations or pdes or something like that
you have a great math background and
that's very useful as a data scientist
and the logic is very useful in
programming as well
so 10 out of 10 i think engineers make
great
data careers so i think you have the
skills
where you might lack the skills is in
programming so i definitely work on your
programming because that is a big part
at least if you want to be a data
scientist
data analysts they don't do as much
programming and you can get away with
more drag and drop
applications but data scientists
typically need to at least know python
or r
or sql or some combination of them um so
i'd work
on your programming or at least know
where your programming stands try taking
that linkedin assessment and seeing if
you pass
know what a for loop is and what a while
loop is
um yeah if you do that you should be on
the
the right track i think um i wouldn't be
too worried about it um i'm going to
have
a youtube video and an article coming
out about what i think about data
science masters
i'm graduating this semester for my data
science master
um if you guys didn't know i've been
getting a master's online part-time took
me two years
from georgia tech it was an okay program
it costs about twelve thousand dollars
um
and the last like two semesters have
been a complete joke
um i haven't liked them uh
anyways i i'm gonna say that for the
youtube video um
it's one of the best master's degrees
out there in general like the best
master's degrees
um i just don't think it's that good so
anyways that's why i'm building data
career jump start to basically
beat the georgia tech online masters
my program is going to be five times
cheaper and i hope five times more value
that's what i'm aiming for
um so hopefully that answers your
question victor thank you for the
question let me know if you have a
follow-up
um did see we had a couple comments here
from
angry she said great i'm glad you
thought so
and linkedin user this is great insight
so proud of you avery
well hey i really appreciate that thank
you so much i can't see who you are
because of your privacy settings i think
um but thank you i really appreciate
your support
okey dokey um
alfonso alfonso said i'd appreciate it
if you can give me
um some advice for creating portfolio
about chemical engineering
on data science or should i focus
or should i not focus on chemical
engineering and do data science projects
in general
okay so you're talking about making a
portfolio
let me show you this really fast alfonso
let me share my screen
again share screen
let me show you my first portfolio that
i ever made okay this is on data crew
jumpstart actually
we could go to the um
my portfolios section and i'll basically
show you this
but i think it is what is it avery j s
uh wix site oh wait that looks like it
yeah okay here's the first portfolio i
ever made
i love chemical engineering subjects but
agree with you i want to have a home
office time and i think it being
chemical engineering plan is not for me
yeah i feel you um okay so here's the
first portfolio i ever made
um let me make it big and let me go to
the home page i made this while
i was a sophomore in school this is on
wix it's just a
website builder and it says avery smith
chemical engineer university of utah
gives a quick introduction to who i am
and my resume
this is not a great portfolio i've
gotten a lot better at making them over
the years
but the point is that i had one and you
can see that it has a little bit about
me
um has about the company i was working
for um
and then it also has my latest work
which is basically
um basically like the projects that i
did
and one of them is classification trees
which is machine learning
um stock stats which is stats right
moore's law which is semiconductors and
you can go to the
blog section blog is a bad name
portfolio is a much better name
should have named it portfolio but you
can see that this is what i was talking
about
uh some of my learnings types of machine
learning decision trees
uh cetera et cetera but here's like for
instance here's one
uh where i put a project from
a um a school
uh project we made a video for it and i
put it on my blog
this blog is super slow so here's the
youtube video of a chemical engineering
project
i'll just play a little bit so you can
see part of it
so we like did this experiment with
these dancing beads
it's like vapor pressure or something
like that i don't fully remember
um so i i mixed chemical engineering
topics and data
topics on this particular blog i think
you can do that
the whole point is that you have
something where people can
resumes have to be one page unless you
have a phd
or 15 plus or 20 plus years in industry
your resume has to be one page that's
kind of a hard rule for me
has to be one page and that's not enough
for someone to fully understand who you
are
and so what you do is on your resume you
link to this website
and this website can have a million
pages you know they can really get to
understand you really see all your work
they can see your skills they can read
about you and have projects there
um i think you can you're fine to
combine chemical engineering
and data science so like here's a
section where i talk about all the
chemicals i had handled
and machines i was trained on here's
some of my like
graphic design work so i mixed a lot of
different things onto this
portfolio i don't think it really
matters
you can have multiple industries people
just want to know that you're
interesting and that you
do good work and so i think you could
definitely mix them
alfonzo definitely i think that's fine
did i answer your question do you have
any follow-ups because i'm not sure i
answered that correctly
so um let me know if you have a
follow-up to that and we can we can take
it right now
in the meantime i'm going to take up
this question here
from zakhra is data data getting
somewhat saturated
um this is one of my myths about data
science is that data
is getting saturated it's not true i
don't think it's true at all
um i i think like if data careers
were a stock i'd be buying the stock
right now because i think they're only
going to go up
you might see a small dip in
salary that's possible especially for
like machine learning
engineers or data scientists i only
think data engineers
are is going to go up i think their
salary is going to go up because i think
they're really needed
but i i don't see data careers
getting saturated at all i think there's
still plenty of room
every business every organization wants
to be doing data
and they can't find good people to hire
um
they want to be making data-driven
decisions they have so many projects
they just don't have enough time to do
it
one i guess thing we could see is
projects often fail in data science and
data in general for a lot of different
reasons
so we could see a decrease in funding
and that could maybe drive the
demand for data careers down but i don't
really see that happening
okay zahra let me ask you this
what are the biggest companies in the
world all right what are the biggest
most successful companies in the world
um actually in the chat go ahead throw
some companies out
what companies do you guys think are the
most successful in the world
um i'll start with some of mine but i'd
be really interested in hearing what
your guys's thoughts are
amazon it's prime day today right people
are spending their whole
wallet on amazon today amazon's a pretty
powerful company pretty successful
their data company they use so much data
engineering they use so much data
science they have so many data rules
that like
you would not believe and they're
growing and they're only going to need
more of them
all right all right zahra says fang
yes so fang stands for let's see if i
can do it facebook
alphabet which is google amazon netflix
and google
oh wait what's the g is g maybe those
are both
i don't know sorry if i don't know if i
didn't get it right um
but yeah netflix you open up netflix and
it says because you watch this
try this that's a machine learning
that's data science
okay facebook you open up facebook and
there's
some random post on the top of your feed
how do they decide that
that's data science that's machine
learning they're only getting bigger
instagram's the same way owned by
facebook uh
google right you google something how do
they know
what you're looking for you just type in
a bunch of words and all of a sudden the
exact website you're looking for pops up
that's data science
so these top companies all these fan
companies i think
are top of the world right they're the
biggest companies and best companies
um and they're growing so they're going
to continue to need data people
and i think other industries are
catching up you take a take a look at
tesla
what tesla's doing to the automobile
industry you know they have
uh automatic driving that is a huge data
problem that they have to solve tons of
data engineering
tons of machine learning tons of data
science that is a big problem to solve
um and they're going to need more people
so to answer your question
i don't think data is getting maybe it's
getting somewhat saturated
but i don't think so i don't think it's
i don't think we're close to saturation
yet
i think we still have a lot of
organizations that are filling their
data roles
how do you feel about andrew i never
know how to say his last name but this
guy is a genius he's like made all of
the
stanford professor if i'm not mistaken
right stanford or mit i'm pretty sure
it's stanford
about focusing on better data as opposed
to iterating on
training so this is an interesting
question this is basically like
should you focus on training machine
learning algorithm and coming up with
different
uh like parameters and different
meta aspects of it focus on different
formats different structure of your
model or should you just get better data
i think better data is always a better
solution i don't think it's always
possible though that's the problem
and that's that's really where i think
data engineers come into play
um and smarter people than me because
i'm good at analyzing data
i'm not great at collecting it i'm not
good at generating
it i'm okay at generating it i guess
i've done that in a couple roles
um but i think if you can get better
here's the thing is it's like i was
talking to scott taylor the data
whisperer the other day and we came up
with this analogy well he came up with
it basically
um but he's really big on making
uh the data governance he's really big
on getting people into
data governance which is basically like
having good data and having it stored
properly
and he's like let's say you're going to
make a meal okay the first thing you do
is you go to the store
you buy the ingredients you bring the
ingredients home you prep the
ingredients
you start to cook you cook the
ingredients and then you eat
let's say eating is basically having
insight out of your data
you can cook you can be as good of a
cook as you possibly can but if you
don't have good ingredients
you're never going to have a good meal
so if you can fix the ingredients
at the beginning then dang that do that
because i mean if you have crappy
ingredients and you're a great chef you
can probably make something that's still
good but not great
so have good ingredients that's a that's
a good thing to improve your company and
improve your organization have good data
thank you for that question that was a
fun question
uh thank you for sharing your blog yeah
you're welcome alfonso
i was wondering if there are any data
sets about process chemical engineering
in order to make an analysis oh yeah
there's
where to find good data specific to
engineering
okay so there's basically two or three
things that come to mind
one is kaggle go to kaggle.com
k-a-g-g-l-e kaggle has all sorts of data
science
uh data sets on there available for
download for free
um there's not like a ton of chemical
engineering there's a lot of bio ones
but those are pretty similar
um but i mean you can find chemical ones
on there for sure
um another great place is google
actually has a database
uh search um engine so
search google database search engine on
google and it'll pop up
and you could type in a subject so for
instance you could type in i don't know
asphaltene kinetics and that'll pop a
bunch of data
some of that is free some of that is
paid for check that out
governments often publish their data i
don't know how much of that would be
chemical engineeringy um but those are
three places to at least start
um okay let's think let's think let's
think
um yeah that's yeah that's my answer
okay here we go joyce
um if you see a job description not a
single job is posted
for newcomers and data they all want
experienced person so how a person
like me can get hired joyce that is a
great question
that is a fantastic question so you're
saying that there's all these job
descriptions and none of them want
someone new they all want
experience okay this is actually
something that i teach
in data career jumpstart um there's
actually a whole lesson taught about
this
and it's titled fabricate your
experience okay
i have never in my life been qualified
for any of the jobs that i've ended up
getting
but how did i do it i faked it till i
made it
and i don't want to say that i faked it
but i i fabricated my own experience
okay i'll give you an example i was a
freshman
and i wanted to work in industry i was
an engineer and i wanted an engineering
job
and i had zero experience other than
working at a gym
that was my one experience my one job in
high school
so i i didn't know what to do
i knew i wasn't qualified so i said you
know what i'm going to i might have to
work for free
for a couple months and then i'll get
experience
and so i cold emailed 20 professors and
i said hey can i do
research for you i didn't say i'd do it
for free but i
i realized that i might have to and one
guy took a chance on me and i worked for
him
part-time for like five hours a week ten
hours a week for three months for free
and then i had experience on my resume
and i got a job as an engineer
so that's one way i fabricated
experience okay two when i was breaking
into data science i didn't necessarily
have data science
skills but i started doing data science
projects i started learning on my own
and doing projects
okay so let me show you so like for
instance if you have a portfolio
if you do data science projects and you
have a portfolio
let's say uh joyce is there some sort of
industry you're interested in
more than others i'm going to go to my
personal website which has my
newest portfolio avery jsmith.com
let's say you were trying like me for
instance i'm interning with the jazz
this summer the utah jazz
um as a data scientist i've never worked
in sports
as a data scientist i never worked in
sports in general but i love sports
um i'm not qualified the most qualified
to
to work with the jazz and there's a lot
of people who want to work in an mba
team
and so what i did in my portfolio i have
two projects that are very specific to
the jazz
so i i went and i web scraped some data
from the jazz
um and i uh was able to come up with a
shot analysis
it's a 42-minute read it has all of my
code a huge write-up of all the stuff i
learned
ton of analysis a youtube video
that explains basically this data
science project that i did
with mba data just for fun quote-unquote
learning purposes right um and
it's really good this is like really
well done very interesting
um i show this to people who work for
the nba they're like oh
that's really good so i don't have
experience i've never worked in the nba
before but look i did this
i'm proving my worth so prove your worth
in a different way
not everyone can work for free like i
did as a freshman in college i
understand people have lives people have
kids
uh people have mortgages and debt okay
that's not an option for everyone to
make your experience
but you can spend time on the weekends
and nights doing a project
that in your field so joyce is there
somewhere you really want to work
let's say you want to work just for
example you want to work for
amazon or something like that okay i
would
find some consumer data in e-commerce
and analyze it this is like amazon hey
amazon director this is something
this is a problem you might have you
might wonder how you can
better get people to buy bundles of
produ of products
so i went through and i found this data
online has all this ecommerce data
uh i analyzed it and i came up with this
algorithm and i think we could use it at
amazon
and of course you're probably never
going to implement it at amazon
but they're like oh i mean look at they
took a use case
they figured out how to solve it they
came up with a solution and they
presented it really well
and so do that fabricate your own
experience i
i apply i'm gonna be honest i am 26
years old okay
i'm 26 years old uh i didn't start
college child i was 20 years old
okay so think about that i only have
possible
six years of experience in the field
that's that's the most
time that i can have i applied to jobs
that required 15 plus years of
experience and i'm like i don't care
i don't care how many years of
experience you're requiring okay
i'm just gonna apply and i'm gonna prove
to you that i
am good i can do things that you need me
to do i don't care about what your
experience you think you need i'm gonna
be cheaper than that person maybe i'm
gonna be better than that person i'm
gonna be younger i'm gonna be smarter
than that person
who cares um okay the one the one caveat
i will say there is sometimes
when it's like a big job opening and
they're getting thousands of reviews
they will like filter for the years of
experience
so that's really tough um
i prefer jobs where you don't have to
compete with a thousand people
um i don't like those companies most the
time okay
long answer uh long-winded hope that
helps joyce
um okay i i did see this is on topic
maybe
um owner avery smith wonderful project
i'll take a look however jazz lost badly
to the clippers
will your project make them win against
them oh
i know for those who didn't watch the
jazz lost in the quarterfinals of the
nba playoffs last week
and it was really sad um i'm actually
not working
so that this is kind of the funny part
as i did a project based off of the
basketball play
and i i really would love to get a job
working for the jazz
in basketball play um but they didn't
have any openings and it was playoffs it
was a little stressful
so instead i'm doing more business
analytics basically
or data science on the business side of
the jazz
so my project will not help the jazz win
more necessarily
uh maybe it will could maybe we'll make
more money and we can spend more money
and then we can have better players and
then we can win
but it's not on the court it's all off
the court funny question though
i like it owner um zachara says love it
glad you're still here i appreciate your
time thank you all for being here i
appreciate you guys this time
all right i'm in sui
swe which is software engineering if you
didn't know about to enter my last
semester as a cs student
a bit late no you're not you're zero
percent late
you are zero percent late at all you're
right on time
are you kidding me you're 100 on time um
you're you're in a great position i mean
there's people
in watching this who are like 60 and
they're like i want to switch to data
science career you're
way early you're a baby you got it
you're gonna
you're you're on time all right a pivot
into a career
in data science as a career or be
competent both can become
industry level via self-study
realistically while working full-time as
a sui
or will it be will that track be much
easier by going into grad school
okay so you're a software engineer you
want to
dip your toes into data science can you
do that while working
and self-study or do you need to take
some sort of grad school
okay it depends on your personality okay
and it depends where you get a full-time
job
you could easily transfer into a data
career without even self-studying if you
work for the right company and you have
the right projects
so for instance let's say you go to
amazon and your software engineer
they probably don't necessarily care
that much about like
once you're at amazon what your degree
is because then you're just an amazonian
right
like you're just an amazon employee and
you could probably get you know let's
say you work as a traditional software
engineer in one to two years
and then you get a project where it's
half software engineering but you deal
with the data scientists a little bit
more
and they're like oh well i want to learn
more about data science like okay
go work for this this uh our sister team
in the data science team
so some big companies it's really easy
to transfer from
one job to another let's say you work
for a really small company so i worked
for vapor sense for a while
vapor sense how do i make it vapor sense
represent
vapor sense had four people or 15 people
um and it was a small company and
we uh had to wear multiple hats and so
one day i went to my boss
i was like hey i our data scientist has
been gone for like six months can i
start doing data science
and he's like yeah if you could do it
and i showed him a project and i was
like look i can do it
he's like okay go ahead and get started
so you can definitely learn data science
on the job
um i've been really tainted by grad
school
i don't think grad school is a great
option unless you want a master's degree
or a phd like if you're like that's a
life goal i just need it
then do it um i kind of regret doing
mine
um to be honest uh i think a much better
solution is
self-study or to be honest my my true
answer is
the best solution is do data career
jumpstart and let me tell you why i
don't mean to like plug my own thing but
i'm building it for
me when i was in college that's exactly
what i'm doing so like this is what i
would have liked if i was in
an undergrad in college and i wanted to
learn data science it's cheap
it's going to be less than three
thousand dollars okay so it's super
cheap that's one semester of a master's
degree
and you take six semesters so do the
math it's
uh one-sixth the price and it's so
practical
my master's degree was so theoretical at
times i don't care about the theory
at all i really don't like it um i just
really don't like the theory
i'm not interested in i just want to
apply apply apply
so uh anyways that's
that's my take um also with self-study
this is also
um i just noticed that you said this
here or sam hi
sam sam said this what are some great
racist resources to self study for da
slash ds field
to work on your own projects are there
any books or sites you would recommend
so once again i recommend
datingcareerjumpstart.com
uh sign up for the course i think it's
worth the money you're gonna have nine
uh nine projects right off the bat that
are gonna be super sweet
um the the other thing
about self-studying is i think it's i
think it is really good i did a lot of
self-studying
um but let me let me give you another
analogy okay
right now and i i love being transparent
that's one of my goals to be transparent
so i'm opening up i'm gonna be
transparent okay uh
right now i or let's say the start of
the year okay
start of the year i weighed 215 pounds
okay i should weigh like 175
like that's what i should weigh so i am
let's see 25
plus 15 40 pounds i'm 40 pounds heavier
than i would like to be
and you know everybody every body is
beautiful
you know weight isn't the end of your
life um but i want to be a little bit
skinnier than i am right now a little
bit more fit
okay um what went wrong in 2020
i tried to self-study my weight loss and
my fitness
okay i try to do it on my own and it
just gets pushed to the side
there's no urgency i just didn't get it
done
and so this year what i've done
differently and i've lost
10 pounds which isn't enough but i've
lost some pounds okay
is i'm not self-studying anymore i paid
like
i paid a grand or two grand i signed up
for all these races
uh i bought new equipment i'm much more
motivated
um i have more urgency i have a race
coming up
and let's see how many days eight plus
seven
17 25 days that's gonna kick my butt and
i'm like oh i need a train
so i'm in the gym every day i'm doing
two a days i'm motivated i'm making
progress i'm getting stronger
because i feel that urgency self-study
sometimes unless you're a very motivated
person
you don't have that urgency and so it
does doesn't happen as much
or doesn't happen as quick which is fine
i mean you can take time
um but anyways that's my opinion on
self-studying okay
but if you're going to self-study okay
are there books or sites you'd i'd
recommend
it depends what you want to learn if you
want to learn data science kaggle
kegel k-a-g-g-l-e it's a great place to
self-study
really cool notebooks competitions uh
very cool learning platform i really
like kaggle
um and then it kind of depends on what
you want to learn that's like more like
model making machine learning that's a
great place to learn machine learning
um in terms of books i'm looking at my
bookshelf right now
i don't have any books that i
necessarily recommend i've never owned
a data science book ever um
kind of funny actually um i guess well i
haven't even read that one so i'm not
gonna suggest that one
i never used a book i have used books
for data visualization
um if you're into data visualization i
do have
a lot of book recommendation
recommendations um
i have too many right now um i've posted
it in the past
oh go ahead storytelling with data is
really good and the edward tufte books
are really good for data visualization
um i have a lot of data visualization
books i'm looking at my bookshelf right
now
i have uh one data design book
like data visualization design four data
visualization five six seven
eight nine i have nine data
visualization books
one two three four
five sports and data books
and i have one two
like business data books that's that's
my data bookshelf right there
oh and i just bought a new data vision
no a data communication book and a data
governance book
so anyways i'm still learning every day
that's the nice thing is you can learn
every day
um sam did i answer your question is
there something specific you want to
learn
um because if it's just d a slash d s
um kaggle's probably the best place to
go in general
for that um i also really like ken g
you guys follow kenji on youtube buddy
of mine
k e n space j
e e i think that's right yeah i think
that's right
um big fan of his youtube page great
content pretty interesting
okay we are at minute 47
um so hopefully i helped you guys answer
some questions tonight
i've got to jet um i have my second
workout of the day to do got to go on a
bike ride
45 minute bike ride and then i gotta go
to bed because tomorrow
i am hiking uh mount olympus in utah
so that's four thousand feet elevation
uh about eight miles or something like
that
oh zahra this is a really good question
i'm gonna i'm gonna leave this
she asked me why didn't you like your
georgia tech masters
i'm gonna leave this because it is too
complex to explain
uh right here i'm gonna do a youtube
video and a medium article about it
um by mid-july um so it's gonna come out
soon
um i saw that i didn't like it
it was okay it wasn't great it wasn't
worth the money
um but i'll leave you on a cliffhanger
now i'm sorry i appreciate it though um
but the
the youtube video will be coming out uh
with an article
sooner rather than later um but yeah
thank you guys all thank you zahara for
being here the whole time
joyce alfonso sam victor
cervando ron uh
murwa all of you guys um
makua thank you guys all for being here
really appreciate you guys his time
and i i hope you guys have a great night
and a good rest of tomorrow
see you guys later thanks

Title: NOW! Data Science Office Hours

Description: RIGHT NOW! Come ask me any question about data science, data careers, personal brands, or LinkedIN!

Video Transcript:
what is up everyone
how's it going we are live it is
tuesday june 15th
and this is the ask avery show where you
guys can ask me literally any question
you want
ask anything you want about data careers
data science data science office hours
resume building personal branding
linkedin
whatever you want to ask it is fair game
and i'm excited i didn't really schedule
this
so this is kind of impromptu if you're
watching on youtube you're watching on
twitch if you're watching on linkedin
hello say hello and say where you're
from
in the comments or i guess where you're
watching from
i want to say hello to each and every
one of you as you guys join the show
um if you guys have any questions for me
go ahead and
drop them in the comments below
and i'll go ahead and take them as we go
today's
series or today's show might be a little
short so if you have a question
ask it now ask now ask me anything
there's no stupid questions
everything's fair game i want to talk
about whatever you guys want to talk
about
um but let's do it with urgency let's
ask now let's ask early
and let's let's get going so first we
have a linkedin user hi avery
thanks for holding the session i'm sorry
i can't see who you are
because of your linkedin uh security
settings probably
but that's okay how are you doing
linkedin user hope you're doing well
do you have a question let me know if
you do
i do want to answer i did get a question
here from
the from the ask avery mailbag
the written mail bag where you can write
me a question i'll answer on the show
this question came in yesterday from
alex
a l e k s alex
and they said hello there i just wanted
to ask what is the price
for your course so if you haven't heard
about this yet i'm really excited about
it i'm releasing a new course
i don't even know of course is the right
word um i like to call it a boot camp
i know there's a lot of negative
stereotypes with boot camps but
i just feel like course isn't
comprehensive enough and this is so
broad this is so wide this is so
in-depth that i'm calling it a boot camp
um so my boot camp is called data career
jumpstart and that's exactly what it is
is it is a jump start to your data
career no matter where you're at
so if you want to jump up positions if
you're just starting from scratch
if you're changing you know from
engineering or business if you want to
get more into analytics and data
this course is for you definitely um so
it's going to basically
replace a data science boot camp oh i
think my camera just died
hold on i oh yep my camera just died um
so hold on let me switch my camera here
camera switching um
okay there we go i'm back at it guys
here i am again
um so anyways keep answering alex's
question this is going to replace
a data science masters a data science
boot camp
um those are typically on the range of
10 to twenty thousand dollars
somewhere in there my course is going to
be
uh about five times cheaper than that so
i'm still i'm still playing with the
the price point um but it's not going to
be any more expensive than three
thousand dollars
so think three thousand dollars or below
um and i know that sounds like a lot
but honestly it is career changing it is
life-changing
um i'm really excited about it um and
it's gonna be worth a lot so
if it wasn't worth anything i wouldn't
charge anything but it's it's worth a
lot
um so i'm really excited about it expect
that to come out later this
summer or early fall um still working on
dates
we got dustin here hey dustin what's up
hopefully
hopefully you're doing well i'm glad to
see you
we have robert robinson here hey every
long time no see
he was on my show earlier where i
interviewed scott taylor for the data
career podcast
and yes robert you are correct that i
used all the battery during scott's
interview
um so now my camera my nice camera's out
of batteries i'm on my back up here
um looks like we got some sweet
questions
um here's one from uh is it janil
hopefully that's how i say that name hi
avery from michigan here
go michigan i like michigan how would
you relate data science to automation
plan automation machine automation etc
okay
good question because there's a lot of
you know there's a lot of things going
on in in terms of
i'll call it i guess what you call it in
corporate world the digital
transformation right
we're hopefully getting more into a
digital world and that involves
a lot of things some of those things are
analytics some of those things
are automation to me
automation is just making uh
computer decisions or decisions without
a human there and i think those are
often
very very very data related um often
there's data science behind those
if you if you look at something like a
robot right a robot is is
automation in some ways um it's
you know computers that are programmed
to
take certain actions based on certain
inputs and that's really what data
science is
so behind every automation i would say
there's some data science there
um if we look specifically at plant
automation
um you know that's what i basically did
at exxon mobil
exxon mobil has you know what is it
maybe a dozen
uh plants and refineries inside of the
united states
the goal of exxon mobil is to make the
most money possible
with the staying within the constraints
of
government regulations and physical
limits as well
right but it's basically a giant
optimization problem
and you're basically trying to make the
best choices you possibly can
to make the most money you can within
the constraints
and in order to do that you can actually
turn it into a big math problem that a
computer can solve
and that's that's data science that's
what i did at exxonmobil
is basically create a math problem out
of the plant operation the refinery
operation
that you could basically optimize to
make the most money possible
and in order to do that you don't want
humans to make the choice because we as
humans don't we're not good at math we
don't know what's best
we think we know what's best but we
don't always know what's best but via
data science and computation you can
actually figure out what is best
and make those decisions automatically
so i really think that data science and
automation
go hand in hand usually automation
you're making a change
based off of a couple inputs there's
some sort of
decision trigger in there and that could
be data science
that could be really simple so for
instance if we just go into like
recycling
you know you can use like an ir infrared
uh camera to basically tell the
difference between plastics
and you might say if the plastic is htpe
move it to the left if it's
ldpe move it to the right that's a
pretty simple
you know decision it's just you're using
technology a sensor
to basically say is this type a or type
b
based off is type a or type b do
something different with it it could be
something a lot more complicated
you could be taking in the weather the
temperature
uh what time of day it is who's on shift
a bunch of different things
and put it into an amn an artificial
neural net and the neuron that actually
makes the decision for you
about whether we should push that to the
left or to the right so
that middle man that's making the
decision it can be really simple
a or b or it can be really complicated
where it's taking in
100 different things and making decision
that is best for our plant
so there's a million ways that data
science can be involved in that process
but i really think the data science and
automation go hand in hand
that was a great question janelle thank
you for that question
for everyone else just joining if you
want to ask me a question
now is your chance you can ask me about
data science you can ask me
uh about linkedin personal branding you
can ask about my new course data career
jumpstart
ask about the podcast data career
podcast you can ask how to get started
in data science
what you should learn technically you
can ask me specific questions
whatever you want you can ask me during
the askgaryvee show which typically is
tuesday night
tuesday nights at 8pm
yes of course jindal i'm glad that
answered your question
um what automation course is best
regarding data science
if there is that's a question here from
muhammad
the best automation course i'm sorry i
don't know
um
yeah i'm sorry muhammad i don't know
i'll have to think about that and get
back to you
um i don't know any automation data
science courses
uh i would say that the best
data science course out there is going
to be data career jump start
my course coming out this fall not not
biased or anything
okay i see robert has a good question
i'm going to uh
i'm going to go to this linkedin user
right here though and answer this one
first and then i'll go to you robert
um linkedin user sorry i can't see who
you are but thank you so much for the
question
i'm trying to start my career in data
analytics good
uh you can consider me a junior in the
field that's okay
we all are we all start somewhere what
and how should i prepare myself for
interviews and how can i get an
interview thanks a lot looking forward
to a great session
okay so let's start with how can i get
an interview
basically there's a couple of different
ways that you can get a job
one is by randomly applying online okay
that is the hardest way to get an
interview
because you are one fish among a lot of
fishes
it's very hard to stand out your resume
maybe is never seen
um for instance i posted a job on
linkedin i
got 400 applicants that applied i
probably looked at
in-depth 30 of them so at 10th of them
i've actually looked at
just because it's so hard to look at
each person individually
so that's the first way you get a job
interview is
applying randomly online the second way
is to do it through networking and that
is much more
easily successful a lot higher hiring
rates
a lot better experience so use your
network talk to people in your network
you know see if your friends if that
where their work if they're hiring
um see if you can post on linkedin and
say who's hiring see if you can find
someone on linkedin who's hiring
send them a direct message and try to
actually have a conversation with
someone
it's always always always easier when
you actually know the person or you can
talk to the person
face to face some somehow that's always
going to be
a lot easier to to get the interview um
in order to get interviews however you
do need to be interesting
okay you need to have a really good
resume your resume has to stand out
my resume is actually you know most
resumes are a white background
my resume is actually black background
because i want to stand out i want to
stick out i want to be interesting
if i handed you 100 resumes you know
physical resumes
here you go i want mine to stand out so
that's one thing i do to make mine stand
out is i actually make it black
okay also once they look at your resume
it has to be impressive
it has to be interesting and it has to
be effective
i think one of the best ways to do that
is by having a personal
portfolio online on having an
online portfolio with a bunch of
projects and a bunch of examples
of problems you've solved in the past
really shows that you're
really smart you can do what you say you
can do it proves your worth
very very very well so i really
recommend having an online portfolio
and actually we do that in data career
jump start so data career jump start the
course i'm
making is only based on projects no
homework
there's lectures but they're all based
on the projects there's going to be nine
projects that you do and each time you
make a project
the first thing we do in the course is
make an online portfolio
that you can post to so you'll have an
online portfolio after each time you
finish a project
you'll post it onto your portfolio that
portfolio will be
front and center on your linkedin front
and center on your resume
it's your go to proof it's basically the
evidence that you're awesome and you'd
make a great employee
so that's what you can do to be
effective once you're in an interview
another thing he says how can i prepare
myself for the interviews
so of course having a good resume having
good
online portfolio is really important
but when it comes to it also depends on
the interviews some interviews are more
technical
so for instance if you're interviewing
for like facebook or netflix
they're gonna have a text technical
section or you're gonna be taking some
sort of technical quiz
that's going to be based off of sql or
python um there's a bunch of websites
that you can prep you can just type in
data science
interviewed problem prep and there's a
bunch of websites that will give you
example problems
that you can try to solve and try to get
a feel
because that just do well on those
technical questions
okay on the non-technical questions when
they're more just like asking you
questions
you want to keep in mind the star method
okay
always answer star so let's see if i can
get it it's situation
task action results every time you get
asked a question so for instance
tell me a time of when you demonstrated
leadership that could be an example
question you would answer with the star
method the situation
in which you showed leadership the task
you were tasked with
what were you asked to do what action
did you take and what result did that
bring
if you stick to the star method when
answering interview questions
it makes you really impressive because
you're basically telling stories and
stories are rememberable
and we love stories as humans so you
know
show show me a time what is your most
technical what's the most difficult
technical task you've ever completed
oh well in 10th grade uh
my teacher asked me to do this project
where i had to figure out the
heating coefficient of a cooling fan um
so that's that's the situation and
that's what you're tasked with too
um so what i did is i ran a couple
experiments i ran ten experiments
where i took the nusult number for each
one of these experiments
and i found the average and that allowed
me to find
the the heating coefficient of these
cooling fans
that's the action you took right the
test the experiments and the result
is i found the dusal or the heating
coefficient and that will allow
other engineers to implement that in
homes
so homes can stay warm i made that
example up it's not the best example
but you get the idea you say the
situation the task the action you took
and the result it bring that is what
makes a good interviewee
and that will make you very uh desirable
as a candidate in these interviews
that's going to make you more hirable
and more likely to get that job
so hopefully that answers your question
i'm stoked for you linkedin user
for starting your career in data
analytics i think you're going to do
awesome
let me know if i can help in any way i
run these sessions
every tuesday at 8 pm eastern
i have the data career podcast where all
of these go
and i do interviews with other people
and i do tips on the data career podcast
just check out data career podcast
wherever you listen to podcasts and of
course you can check out
dataqueerjumpstart.com
which is going to be my course basically
my crash course for everything i know
i'm going to teach you how to pattern
your career exactly like mine to get the
results that i did so you guys can be
making six figures and working remotely
and having the career of your dreams
that is my goal and to do so at a low
cost
so data careerjumpstart.com okay
that was a lot a lot of talking i don't
know if you can tell i'm kind of losing
my voice
i've done a lot of talking today okay
great
any other questions feel free to ask me
about how to start your career and data
linkedin how to post on linkedin when to
post on linkedin how to build a personal
brand
any questions go ahead and ask them in
the comments below
i'm gonna take a question from robert
here he said how was the mission trip
so for those who don't know uh the last
two and a half weeks
i actually i didn't work i took them off
that's one of the the nice perks
of owning your own business is you just
have a little bit more flexibility
in your schedule so um
i got asked to be a an adult like
chaperone
on a youth humanitarian trip i had about
18 hours of notice
and i was on a flight to the dominican
republic to chaperone this this youth
group
and uh it was awesome wonderful
experience
uh definitely something i'm adding to my
life resume i'll
always remember some of the moments and
the memories that i had from that trip
great experience uh awesome people i got
to meet the dominican republic
the locals were truly awesome and
we love spending time with them i love
speaking spanish
um anyone speak spanish if you speak
spanish and you're watching
uh add something to the comments say
hello um
i can speak spanish but my accent is
really really bad super bad
um but i can kind of speak spanish so it
was fun to speak spanish
um uh we got to build a school or at
least build part of a school
they'll keep building it the rest of the
summer and finish but we got
a decent amount done with the foundation
and the walls
um it was awesome to just spend the time
with these teenagers
learn from them learn of their love they
all became really good friends
and loved each other when we when we
said goodbye in the airport they all
cried because they had made these
lifelong best friends
they didn't know each other before the
trip they were from all over the united
states
nevada idaho california texas
arizona florida all over um
mississippi and they left his best
friends which was which was really cool
um i had a great time i learned a lot
about my life i had a lot of once in a
lifetime
opportunities i swam in this beautiful
waterfall uh because we do we do
out of the 17 days we do about uh 12 of
them
hard work um and then we spend the the
other or maybe maybe 10 of them hard
work for them
fun and then three of them traveling um
so i had some awesome
river rafting awesome rappelling down a
huge waterfall
just helps with my bravery and my
spontaneity um
you gotta push in order to grow you have
to be outside your your comfort zone
and i definitely was so thank you for
the question robert
i had a great time can't wait to do some
more humanitarian work
um i really want to go to africa next
year that's that's my goal
it's expensive though so saving up to go
to africa
okay got some more questions here um
linkedin user
glad that was useful and yes check out
the podcast
thank you for your comment i really
appreciate the question um okay we got a
question here from muhammad and jose
um all right i'm gonna take jose's first
jose what's the best way to create and
share your portfolio of projects to
build your brand
this is a great question and this is
what i built data career jumpstart
around completely
data crew jumpstart literally i almost
called it
so in in the program i i go by four p's
okay
four ps that is the main part of the
program the four ps
what are they personal practical project
portfolio that is my philosophy the 4p
philosophy
and that is how i made my career in data
science was through
personal practical project portfolio
okay so the best way to do it jose is
just to start
okay what's something that interests
interest you jose what's something that
is important to you in your life
that you care about you know maybe it's
how you spend money maybe it's how
much you sleep each night maybe it's how
um maybe it's how many miles you run a
week these are things i care about so i
don't know if you care about them jose
maybe you love sports maybe you're
really into sports or
or maybe you're really into i don't know
religious things maybe you're really
into the quran or the bible or something
like that
pick something you're really interested
in and find some data with it
okay so for instance if we take you know
personal finance
you can use an app like mint that'll
track all of your spending
okay so you're gonna collect data or
find data online
on something you're interested in and
you're gonna do a project on it
okay um you're gonna you're gonna create
a project and
maybe you already have projects i'm
rereading your question now what's the
best way to create and share your
portfolio
so maybe you're talking maybe you have
projects you're talking about the
portfolio
in data career jumpstart we talked about
this i just recorded the lectures for
this uh just recently
um so basically uh you need to make it
interesting and easy to access those are
the two biggest things
um that's all that really matters so
there's different ways you can do that
but i think having a dedicated website
to your portfolio is probably the best
way to do it you can do that through two
different ways in my mind
easily because that's all you also want
to be easy you don't want to be too
complicated
so you can use a drag and drop
website builder like squarespace wix
wordpress
a couple others cards stuff like that
and make a website
there um buy a custom domain for
instance mine is avery jsmith.com that's
where you can find my portfolio
hook it up to your website post you know
once every other week once a month um a
project that you've done
put it on there put it on your resume
and put projects on your resume
and have a hyperlink back to your online
portfolio
so they can go see your code go read
your
your analysis on the website
actually get a feel for the project you
know maybe you have a slide deck online
maybe you have a written report you know
pdf online maybe you have a blog post
online that explains it
but just make it so they can actually go
see some of your actual work
you know if you think about it it's so
funny because
we hire people mostly based off of their
resumes
what is a resume it's a one-page piece
of paper that people can make up
it's a one-page piece of paper that
doesn't mean anything you know
um but you can't make up an online
portfolio you can't make up projects
this is physical evidence tangible
evidence of work you've done in the past
say
this is a project i had in the past
maybe at work maybe at school
maybe for fun like i talked about doing
about your hobby say this is this is
i love doing i love soccer so i found
some data on soccer
and i came up with this analysis and
here are my results about soccer
and it gives you something to talk about
with employers with your peers with
people it just helps build your brand so
you know
start a website start a wordpress
whatever
i use github pages for mine which is a
little bit more complicated but gives
you a little bit more flexibility
a little more more coding centric um i
like github pages a lot
in data career jumpstart i teach people
how to start
portfolios at either a squarespace type
thing
or a github pages and of course during
the project
during the course we do nine projects to
add to your portfolio
so by the time you're done with the
course you know you have a three by
three grid
of all your of all your projects that
you have in your portfolio
okay jose did i answer your question any
other follow-ups to that
let me know in the meantime i'm going to
run here to
muhammad who asks what is your
impression of online internships
as compared to physical internships as
an employer
um well muhammad i am done with
working in person i am done i'll never
do it again
unless i really really really really
love the job and i really really really
love the people
um but i don't see it happening to be
honest at least
at least full time you know maybe three
days a week in the office sure
um but nothing rigid nothing permanent
i'll never do it again um so i love
working remotely
so that's i'm i'm kind of biased to this
question
i love working remotely i have a dog
um i was like oh wait i haven't seen her
but i just remembered that my friend
took her on a hike um so i was like oh
crap that's scary
um okay but yeah i love spending time
with my dog every day
my wife doesn't work on wednesdays so i
love being at home with her
um i love working remotely i'm an
introvert
actually at heart so i don't really
necessarily feed off of
people being around me i love having a
fridge close by i love not having to
commute
i love everything about working remotely
um
i do think you do lose some things right
muhammad um
you do lose especially as an intern i
think you lose some things
because one part of the internship a big
part of the internship is just
getting no culture getting no people um
getting to know the process so that can
be really hard
if you're doing online you just don't
like bump into people randomly
like you would at the office so i think
i think that's pretty hard
but i think it's really nice it opens up
a lot of doors um right now
i'm actually an intern i'm an intern for
an mba
team the utah jazz um and it's awesome
because otherwise i'd have to do
meetings
in like salt lake city which is like an
hour's drive away away from me
so i don't get the benefit of being like
inside of the jazz offices you know
bumping into
different people inside the organization
making my face
and my name known as much so i think
that's a downside
but i don't have to commute i get to
work from home
and i love that um so i think i think
there's a trade-off between online and
physical internships
i do think the future is online so i
think we just have to get used to it
and learn how to get better at it um
there's actually a company in utah
that a couple people a couple friends
including matt sharp on linkedin
work for called mx to fintech company
and they actually bought all of their
employees oculus vr headsets
and so sometimes they have meetings and
like hangout sessions in vr
so you can kind of see people's faces
and like kind of run into them and bump
into them
i think that's pretty innovative kind of
weird but but pretty innovative
um i think that's pretty cool um
so i love online internships i
definitely think
i love online working i think online
internships are a little harder
i think when i hire people it'll mostly
be online and it just opens up the door
to so many more opportunities because in
the past
you like for instance i'm a chemical
engineer okay i
i did my undergraduate at the university
of utah there's not
many chemical engineering jobs and
internships in utah
but if i can do an online internship
that opens up my fields
to so many more um
opportunities versus present just being
physically present so
there's goods there's bads i'm a fan i
think they're here to stay
i am an online intern i will hire online
interns
on online jobs remote work
i'm a big fan if you couldn't tell so
thanks for your question muhammad
glad that helped glad i helped you jose
let me know if you have any follow-ups
definitely if you're interested check
out datacareerjumpstart.com
sign up for uh notifications when the
course is
live definitely want to check that out
all right we've been going 30 minutes
any other questions
last call for questions i know we got
derek here derek what's good
avery been way too long stupid job but
keeping me busy
well hey i'm i'm glad you're busy at
work i think right
better than being bored at work um but
glad
glad to see you man been missing you
hope you're doing well hope you and your
family
are doing well i heard it was stormy
down there in texas today
hope you guys are well and blessed
miss you man i hope you're doing good um
okay
any last minute questions questions yes
muhammad of course you're always welcome
for the answer thank you for the
question i appreciate it last minute
questions on personal brand
running stocks
dominican republic for being your own
business freelancing
uh linkedin data science data
engineering data analytics database any
last questions
i'll give you guys a couple seconds here
okay
oh derek has a linkedin question um do
you feel like linkedin is starting to
feel more and more like
facebook recently that's a good question
derek
to be honest i'm not on facebook very
often
so i don't necessarily like i don't
really scroll through facebook so i
don't necessarily know
what facebook looks like recently and i
guess part of that was just because i
hated it
um i really hate um political debates to
be honest
i'm obviously i think politics are
important
but i'm not super interested in them um
i have a hard time
with people that can't see both sides of
the aisle um i'm i'm pretty independent
and so i i just don't really like people
that say my way or the highway
um and facebook's a lot of that
especially with politics um
have i seen linkedin getting more
political
no i don't know maybe a little bit um
the polls are really hot right now
and i've been doing a lot of polls um
that might be a little bit more
facebooky like for instance today
i did a orders of operations poll quiz
that i probably would have seen on
facebook you know two years ago so maybe
in that case
um that's true oh also uh
yeah i guess derek says an intentional
algorithm
manipulation i mean polls are so hot
right now
uh people will do dumb polls just so it
gets seen by a lot of people
uh but i'm okay with it um i'm i mean
i'm doing it i have done polls
i i pulled today and i did a poll
yesterday
um they drive discussion though they
really
drive discussion that people are
interested in opinions
um so i'm a fan of polls um he does say
it's a little bit
uh more click baby i think that's true
um any sort of social media any sort of
marketing you need to be
sometimes outrageous to to get the
eyeballs right money is where the
eyeballs are so in order to get eyeballs
you have to you have to be interesting
and often outlandish
outrageous things are are interesting um
now that like my whole livelihood kind
of depends on
on me marketing myself and marketing my
brand
i think i've gotten a little bit more
okay with it which maybe i'm
desensitized to it
obviously you never want clickbait you
never want lies you never want
exaggeration
um but i i don't know
uh i'm trying to think what i've seen
recently
i just hope i just hope people you know
they stay true to themselves
and they they focus on bringing people
value you know
when i post on linkedin i sometimes i
don't but most the time i'm trying to
bring value
okay so like for instance today people
are really enjoying
the uh the math quizzes the weekly math
quizzes i've been doing
they're not really informative
necessarily but they're fun they're kind
of
brain stimulating reminding nostalgia
but i hope when people post on linkedin
they say what value can i bring my
neighbor today
how can i help them and if we keep doing
that on linkedin linkedin's gonna stay
great i think
um okay this is the last question i'm
gonna take because i'm losing my voice
um i still need to read 10 pages in a
book today run a half
hour and go to a little little uh
neighborhood
concert thing that i'm going to all
right i got i got two more i got another
question from jose i'm going to answer
too
all right regarding freelancing what
type of data science can pay more
i see people go posting gigs for cheap
what pays more wow if you are a good
data engineer
that pays great and that's high in
demand lots of jobs
if you have cloud computing skills
you're set
you don't have to worry too much about
about anything
if you're a good data engineer or if you
want to get good at something get good
at cloud computing data engineering
big data spark hive uh
that type of thing you never have to
worry um
i i think people charge different
amounts um
but most the time low quality
or lower pay jobs get lower quality jobs
i charge a lot because i bring a lot of
value you know what i'm saying
like i talked about earlier with data
career jumpstart if it was a crap course
i'd i'd sell it for a hundred dollars
you know if it wasn't worth anything a
hundred dollars
ten dollars whatever thirty dollars
fifty dollars but i know there's a lot
of value
and i i'm putting tons of value into
this course
i know it's going to help a lot of
people so i charge a lot so i think
that's true of of gigs i mean
people people can hire cheap but they're
going to make a cheap work so
all right last question here from jose
what are your thoughts on unpaid
internships assuming the intern is
interested in learning
jose you have opened up a can of worms
with me i am very passionate about this
topic
i posted about it on my story the other
day maybe some of you guys saw it
i saw a post on linkedin that said
unpaid internships should be made
illegal
um and i 100 disagree i'm an unpaid
intern right now
i made six figures i made over a hundred
grand last year
and i'm an unpaid intern right now
because i want to learn i think if
anyone signs up for
an unpaid internship they're getting
something out of it you wouldn't sign up
for it
unless you were okay so if you don't
have experience
so when i was a freshman in college i
was an unpaid intern for three months
i didn't have any experience i couldn't
get a job no one no one should have
hired me
i was i didn't know anything i was
useless and
someone you know hired me as an unpaid
intern
and that gave me experience and then i
got a job that was twelve dollars an
hour
and then i got a job that was fifteen
dollars an hour and then i got a job
that was seventeen dollars an hour
and then i got a job that was forty two
dollars an hour and then i got a job
that was fifty dollars an hour and then
i got a job that was a hundred
dollars an hour and everything started
for free
everything started for free but it was
worth it
i got experience it led me to the next
step which led me to the next step which
led me to the next step
um and so i'm a big fan i've hired
unpaid interns they did it for school
project
they got the school project out of it
and learned a ton for me
and they got a job because they had this
on their resume
they're like oh you worked for snow data
science that's pretty cool and they're
using their their skills they learned
from my internship with them at their
jobs they're a better employee now
you know so i'm very passionate i think
unpaid interns i don't think they should
be
every time you know i was a paid intern
at times i've done paid internships as
well
um but sometimes you have no experience
and or
or it's a huge reach right now i'm
interning for the utah jazz
i i wanna i love basketball it would be
my dream
to be a data scientist for an nba team
dream dream job
but it's hard to get in because everyone
wants to do it and i'm getting my foot
in the door by
working for free that's okay i'm getting
something out of it
now the flip side is and someone
commented this on my comment
that only privileged people can afford
to work for free
and it's hard because i i come from a
pretty privileged background
acknowledgeably i'm a white male i live
in the united states
um my parents you know i wasn't super
poor growing up they hadn't always had
enough they had food on
dinner play i went to a good school um
so i recognized privilege is real and i
you know i've had privileges in my life
um but i think the privileged card gets
played overplayed a little bit too much
um because it's not just my privilege
that got me there you know my parents
didn't pay for school
you know my parents didn't pay for my
housing i paid for it i figured it out
i lived dirt cheap for those three
months i didn't get paid and it all
worked out um
so it's kind of hard because i didn't
have to pay for my brothers and sisters
i didn't have a kid i needed to pay for
um you know i overall i had a pretty
good background so
i can't i can't say i'm not too much
about unpaid internships
but i actually think there's a time and
a place for unpaid internships
albeit i i think there's a time and
place for paid internships
i think most internships should be paid
if you have experience then i think you
should you should get paid
if you don't have any experience if
you're like a freshman in college and
you don't know what's going on at all
or or if you're making a big reach like
i am with with the nba in the utah jazz
if you're getting experience then you're
getting experience and that that's not
that's not unpaid you're getting paid
just not in currency in experience
in networking in relationships nothing's
unpaid
maybe monetarily but you're getting
you're getting something out of the
internship
guaranteed something that's my rant
i'll get off my pedestal um thank you
guys thank you muhammad thank you derek
thank you jose thank you linkedin user
thank you janil for some of these fun
questions thank you robert
i appreciate you guys we did 40 minutes
on the ask avery show today um reminders
reminders if you missed the ask avery
show
or you missed any interviews i do you
can always check them out data career
podcast
um hey i've been posting more on youtube
recently
go check out my youtube avery smith data
scientist on youtube
um sign up for notifications for my boot
camp that's really project and portfolio
based
that'll be coming out later this summer
it's going to be all things data science
boot camp
you can find it at data or data
careerjumpstart.com
um as always i appreciate you guys you
guys are awesome
please please please let me know if
there's anything i can ever do for you
guys
please let me know send me a dm um i'm
still catching up on dms since i was
gone two and a half weeks and didn't
have access really
um so still catching up on those so be
patient with me but appreciate all you
guys
um hope you guys have a good day or a
good night wherever you are and we'll
catch you guys on the flippity

Title: What is Data Management? w/ Scott Taylor - The Data Whisperer

Description: Come join me for the next episode of the Data Career Podcast. Scott Taylor, The Data Whisperer, will be joining the show to explain all things data management, governance, and story telling. Episode is live at 2PM ET, and of course available on the Data Career Podcast after.

Video Transcript:
all right hello everyone
and welcome to another episode of data
career podcast
super excited for uh today's guest um we
have an awesome guest we have scott
taylor
i'm really excited to introduce him you
can see him on this side of the screen
right here
with his with his truth that scott
explain explain the truth that what tell
me about the truth out
in data there's truth and there's
meaning
there's data management and there's
business intelligence
you have to determine the truth first
before you derive
meaning i'm obviously on the truth team
hence the meaning of my truth hat
but it's not chicken or egg here it is
egg and omelet if you do not have truth
in data
you're not going to get very good
meaning all right
that there you go you guys heard it here
first i guess maybe not first probably
first time
if you guys have ever seen scott before
which you probably have
because he's all over the place on lots
of podcasts and
lots of shows he's he's usually is it an
always or is it
usually scott what which one are you
always or
usually wearing the truth hat i'm
usually wearing the truth
okay that is the truth about about the
truth hat
um anyways if you're watching go ahead
and uh if you're watching live that is
go ahead and uh throw in a where are you
watching from tell me where you're
watching from introduce yourself scott
and i will say hi
um yes
um as you can see scott's really awesome
i'm gonna go ahead and introduce him
formally now scott
taylor the data whisperer am i right
yeah
is a sought after speaker author and
data evangelist
he has over 45 000 followers on linkedin
that's a lot of fun accounting
and it might have gone up since since
now i don't know i wrote this i think a
day or two ago
okay maybe it's maybe it's gone up quite
a bit uh
he has spent over he's been over two
decades
solving master data challenges with
companies like nielsen and microsoft
he's the author of telling your data
telling your data story which is
available on amazon definitely go check
that out oh
got it right there check that out and
he'll be
moderating the master data marathon 3.0
which is an online
event with 24 straight hours of data
talk which happens this september
29th and 30th definitely want to connect
with scott taylor
at least on linkedin and i'm so stoked
to have scott on my show
glad to be here avery what a great
introduction 26.2
hours as a proper marathon we're going
mileage to hours that was actually the
idea of
our mutual friend kate strachani who's
always got value to add no matter what
conversation
but we're around the world around the
clock and i do all that other crazy
stuff
do you stay up for the full the full
step
yes i do yes we have like a break a
small sort of rest break
where we replay some of the morning
stuff for
basically the asia-pacific atmosphere
but otherwise yeah i'm up the whole time
wow yeah that's
that's crazy the other two so yeah it
gets it gets pretty wacky in those wee
hours anybody watching that wants to
we've got a discount might as well plug
it
if you're interested in the mdm marathon
mdm
50 is the discount code go to
thinklinkers.com and
they'll set you up sweet that's that's
good to know i i think that's definitely
a cool event and and one unlike uh any
other
so there's nothing else like it nothing
yeah definitely
take advantage of it i just want to give
some quick shout outs to some people
that uh mentioned that they're watching
robert
how are you man yeah always see you
someday you know eventually you'll
uh remove the mask from the from the
little shot but we love it anyway robert
yes you popping up
yeah we need watching from albuquerque
from albuquerque
that's great we got jared watching from
orem utah
i'm in linden utah that's about five
miles away or
less so oh really oh you're pretty close
you know each other
i don't know you jared jared we should
know each other go to the data diner
somewhere and you talk hang out yeah for
sure or or
and when i'm in utah i'm always hiking
so i
i want people to go on hikes with me so
jared let's go for a hike sometime okay
we got ranjit um
rasheed from morocco that's far away
okay if you go straight east
from my apartment in a kayak i
looked at it on the on the globe here
straight east you hit morocco without
without altering your course yeah
i don't even know where you're at scott
where where are you based at i'm in
blackrock connecticut dana whisperer
world headquarters high atop the fairway
tower and resort in beautiful blackrock
connecticut
on the shores of the hermann beach
it's fantastic here so wow you had that
nailed
looking out that's my kind of quick
intro usually when i go live
if you look out that way you'll see 70
miles of long island coastline across
the long island sound i got a kayak i go
right off the parking pier
i've got like billion dollar views in
this apartment building
which is an incredible eyesore to the
rest of the neighborhood
but we don't have to look at it because
we're in it so we uh
just look at the views all these idyllic
new england town
little uh lighthouse boats going by
60 boats in my backyard in the
summertime
all moored over there but uh it's it's
spectacular i don't i don't feel like
going anywhere else
it's great it's been here great hey that
that's awesome i'm glad
i'm glad to glad to hear that it's nice
to love where you live so
yes i'm i'm really glad that that you
love that
um and and thank you everyone else who's
watching who maybe i haven't i haven't
said where you're watching from but
thank you guys appreciate you all yeah
um and if you're listening afterwards on
the podcast hello to all you podcast
listeners because this will be up
probably by the end of the day if not
tomorrow at the data career podcast
okay um okay so let's get into it scott
you and i have interacted a couple times
on linkedin
obviously commented on each other's
posts we're in a couple group messages
together
this is our first time talking i guess
face to face yeah it's our first time
yes it is
i was thinking that too that's kind of
amazing because we already sort of know
each other the power of social media yet
we've never spent any direct time
together
no yeah yeah exactly that is social
media
yes yes exactly and and hopefully we'll
meet actually face to face
um someday sooner than later um
but for those who haven't heard about
you we talked a little bit about your
truth hat um your
your data well actually i guess you're
the data whisperer right that's that's
your title
um but you do a lot with with data
governance master data
um i'm i'm a data scientist so i do
things like with data visualization
machine learning
kind of further down the end you're kind
of at the beginning of the cycle of data
just for all of those all of us dumb
people who don't know anything
what is data governance what does that
phrase actually mean
the truth determining the truth for your
organization data governance data
management data stewardship
mastery data reference data mdm rdm pim
dam all these foundational activities
that create
and steward and distribute the content
that everyone down the data line uses
so your data science activity is
directly
is inextricably linked to
the output of your data management group
wherever you are
working you know where do you get the
data from
it's got to be well managed it's got to
be well structured
so as you suggest i'm where data starts
here where data ends up
both are important in every data journey
literally but if you don't start right
you're not going to
end up correctly and most people
don't really spend enough time on the
data management side as far as
as far as i've seen as far as i'm
concerned so i'm out there preaching and
evangelizing on the yesterday garbage in
garbage out
rubbish and rubbish out i like to say
goodness in goodness out that works too
but i elevate that comment to the notion
of the golden
rule of data do upon your data as you
would have it do upon you
oh i i like that that sounds that sounds
familiar i've heard something similar to
that before
it was probably from me
[Laughter]
yeah or or some guy starts with a j or
something like that
um that that's awesome so
he he initiated the first version of
that that's true you're absolutely right
yes
um okay so it's it's like
you're at the very start of data um
and and help me out here so that's
that's like making sure
we know where our data is coming from
what format it's coming
in as like how are we collecting it is
is that
that's that type of stuff yeah more like
the collection and true management of it
so
data's got to be mastered it's got to be
structured if you have a
let's say anything you're doing in data
science has to do with customers
probably a little bit are brands that's
basically what a business is all about
how to deliver
value to your relationships through your
brands at some form of scale
is what i've seen every company try and
do
so that that that relation that data
about those relationships customers
vendors partners prospects whatever the
citizens
patients consumers clients whatever you
call your relationships
that's got to come from somewhere
internally
the challenge the classic challenge is
that every organization certainly at the
end an
enterprise which is the space that i
live in the enterprise space you've got
multiple systems
you've got different departments that
are supported by those systems
they create different versions of what
ends up being the same thing
what a customer is in your fintech
system might be an account
in your erp it might be a company
in salesforce you know you got different
names for these
all that stuff's got to get standardized
and structured in a way that the rest of
the organization can
can trust it can depend on it and do the
rest of the work they want to do
yeah okay so that makes sense it's like
making sure
team a and team b are calling things the
same way
they're classifying it you know like for
instance like you said are they
customers or are they partners or are
they clients
um making sure that all of all of the
kind of like the i don't want to call it
the metadata but like the
ideas behind the data are matched up
across an organization
yeah it is metadata metadata is part of
it metadata reference data master data
all the kind of you know boring stuff
that people think oh what's that
why do i need that you add a lot of
insight right so data scientists had
insight they had
kpis indicators intentions
direction to be using that data where
how do you put it in a business context
to drive some form of action
i look at all that if you think of like
a really fancy data visualization
technique let's call it a table
people are really good at columns
they're not so good at rows
you got to land the rows so in a
in a hyper simplistic way data
management
makes the rows happen business
intelligence there
are the columns
truth meaning i try to boil this stuff
down to the
to its essence in some way so
the business side which we're both going
after for funding and support and
engagement
can understand what the heck we're
talking about
okay yeah i i think i think that makes
sense
um and that that word or that phrase
keeps getting thrown around
map master data what what is master data
master data is the
common business data shared across an
organization
systems and processes and departments if
you look at wikipedia it should still be
in there
that's my definition i put in wikipedia
from a white paper
i battle with people because sometimes
they take it out because they think it's
too simple
i'm sorry if i'm too simple for you i'm
trying to explain it to people who don't
know what you're talking about
that's the point you got to be you know
simple doesn't mean easy
it means accessible so
you know try and really kind of boil it
down but master data is what
they're the nouns of the business that's
what they're commonly referred to as
so any analytics you do what is that
analytics about
what it's about is the master data part
of it
oh we're just trying to determine the
you know our our product penetration
okay product
what's the product do you have that
defined somewhere is that structured
is it uh is it a variant or a flavor of
a product that's really part of
a product set that's part of a bigger
brand that's part of a master brand
that's part of uh
you know that hierarchy structure that's
got to be done
somewhere in a way that everybody
understands all those roll-ups same
things with relationships
ship twos bill twos plan to sell twos
you know what level your ceo interacts
at a
customer is different than the level
that maybe the account team or
the level that the shipments go to but
they're all part of this
thing called customer and you've got to
have
a standardized well-managed view of that
otherwise you don't know what you're
looking at
so yeah it gets gets really complicated
really confusing really quickly
so we're just here trying to clarify the
space
noor o'neil hopefully i pronounce that
right thank you
yeah i i agree i agree i think i think
you explained that that very well scott
i also that's all i do that's all
people get confused sometimes because
they they they start asking me or get
pretty deep into how you do stuff i'm
all about the why
i don't touch the how i just talk about
how people talk about
the data management side of the space
and try to help people
explain it in a business accessible
fashion
so they can get support and funding and
all the other things they're looking for
okay yeah and that makes sense but but
let me ask you this
the data whisperer let me ask you this
what if i don't do gay
data governance if i i'm just like ah i
don't really care about that i'm just
not gonna do it what happens to me as an
organization
as an organization then your data's
going to suck
so and if your data sucks then your
analytics suck
so if all you want to do is do data
science then it's going to you know to
push that metaphor
it's going to blow up in your test tubes
on your lap it's
not gonna work you could do something in
a nice little petri dish
you could try you know three things and
this might work
for some kind of you know indication of
some propensity to do
whatever but you want to put it in
production
you can't unless you've got this
structured content that you can depend
on
you're even before you get the data
science if you don't do data governance
then are you billing the right people
are you shipping stuff to the right
place
are you in an e-commerce platform that
doesn't
expose what your product really is to
the folks who might want to buy it
it's you know you're doomed and uh
everybody does some form of it
especially
in areas like finance that's kind of
where it all started in my view
the chart of accounts here's our list of
you know who we're getting money from
that better be right
yeah if you don't govern that you're in
you're gonna be in a world to hurt
if you don't govern your data then
you'll get a data breach
and you'll blow your brand up because
everybody will think you didn't treat
the data the right way so
they're really at the enterprise level
there is no option
if you need somebody to say that i'll
say that it's not like let's just
do data science because it's so cool and
it does all this fancy stuff
and we hire all these people and we can
do all that's like saying
i'm just want to cook i don't care about
the ingredients i just want to cook and
have a good meal
but we're not going to go shopping we
don't care i
i don't and so that makes zero sense
right yeah i think in my view as not
doing data governance but wanting to do
business intelligence or analytics of
any sort
you can't do it you can't cook a meal
unless you got ingredients
yeah if the if the beginning is missing
it doesn't really matter how hard you
try or how good you are at the ending
steps
if like jared said earlier garbage in
garbage out you know you got to get that
first step
nailed how how
how directly influenced is the quality
of a
meal right you want to have a good meal
what's the connection between a good
meal and the ingredients that make the
meal
up uh i would say definitely part of it
yes yeah you know you can be a great
cook you can have you know i've got this
new
equipment i got this viking stove and i
got all this other wonderful stuff and
i'm
ready to go and you bought a bunch of
crappy ingredients it doesn't matter how
good you are
so i know you need all that other stuff
but the one thing that
will make sure it doesn't work is bad
data
bad again i like i like the analogy
it makes sense um i i worked for
exxon mobil which is a kind of a big
company
um for two years yeah
it's it's pretty big um and obviously
with a large organization
with lots of data you run into these
problems a lot
um and i definitely think we could have
used a
a scott taylor data butt whooping
session
to to whip us all into shape because
your data butt whipping for higher so
anyway yeah
i call it data evangelism as a service
but maybe it'll be you know we'll extend
the brand to call it butt whipping but
yeah you got to get these people riled
up let them know
that it's important i mean exxon mobil's
got data governance they've got
it i don't know how exposed you were to
it
i often wonder how much of the data
science community is really engaging
with the data management community
because when i hear data scientists talk
about and almost brag about how you know
60 to 90 to 120 of their time
is spent munging and wrangling data
i believe that a lot of that can be
avoided
if they've got better data to begin with
and that better data is going to come if
you're in an enterprise
and you're in data science you must
reach out and connect with the data
governance data management
side of the business and not like the
tech folks who are just
plugging the apis in because that's
plumbing
that's got to work but they don't
they're not
they're not in charge of quality and
consistency and structure
get to the you know the true data
leaders
and find out where the good stuff is
yeah
that that's interesting because i i hate
that statistic that it's like 80
of data science work is data cleaning i
have found that not to be true
good in both of my you know my jobs in
industry
um so i guess you're right i guess the
the data governance had to at least be
somewhat good to get to that that point
you know
um but i challenge that i challenge
people who say that and go okay so if
you're a data scientist and you spend 80
of your time data cleaning what are you
really a data janitor
yeah you're a data janitor exactly so
if if you spend most of your time doing
something
no matter what your title is that's what
you are
so you don't want to do that either if
you're a data scientist you don't want
to be doing that
crappy stuff so yeah get better data
better data is better yeah
i i agree um and something you said that
uh and also this question from owner
right here
he says who should be responsible for
data governance data engineers or
somebody like
governance engineer so i was thinking
yeah
i mean i wouldn't say engineer
necessarily it's a
leader somewhere in the data management
that you know if you have a cdo it's
there
that's who's responsible for it
cdo being chief data officer all right
yeah yeah
i know some people are a cdo chief
digital officer i'm like
why why is digital a thing like its own
thing what that's like it's pretty broad
you know that's like having a cmo chief
marketing officer and also a chief
i don't know tv officer it's like a form
of
yeah is everything digital is technology
it's hardware software it's data it
needs data management so i don't get
that part of it there's probably some
cdo's chief digital officers who could
explain that to me
maybe but wondering why that's a c level
role
yeah that doesn't doesn't make a whole
lot of sense um
i know you're um i guess you guys are
not related
you're not related to ben taylor right
no no we're uh
brothers from different parents
different mothers different mothers
different fathers
okay uh i remember he alphabetically
were very close
you guys are very close yeah that's very
true
um i remember he had a linkedin post one
day and was basically like
you are not a top-tier company
or or it's hard to be a top tier company
if you do not have a cdo
at least it's hard in the future i
thought that was a really interesting
comment
um yeah because it is such a big part
yeah finally you got to get data out of
the it space at the i.t
because they focused primarily it took
decades it seems for the
markets to realize this but the tendency
was more information technology rather
than information
yeah and it was like oh the business has
the data and
this is like well i thought you had the
data it goes in computers
well yeah but you didn't give me the
requirements yeah but
i didn't even know what they were so
it's like this
bickering goes on forever so
i think it's the personification of
business oriented
management accountability
of data and analytics right
data-oriented stuff for an organization
yeah that i think that makes sense and
as we're talking it seems like to me and
with owner's question
it seems like data governance's
responsibility
is to dream up what the data should look
like
and organize it like this is the ideal
situation for our data
data engineers job is to format and
structure that data
in a way that follows someone from data
governance's
vision to make it all easy for someone
like on the back end like an analyst or
a data scientist
to to do the the analyses necessary to
to bring you know the value to to some
sort of a company
but but if you don't get that first step
right you're done yeah yeah that's a
reasonable explanation
okay okay um good job
hey thanks well you taught me i so if i
got if i got it wrong it was it was your
fault just
take all the credit nice yes
okay here's the question is data
management and data governance
synonymous or what's the difference
between the two there's differences i
don't get too deep into it you want to
ask someone like you know george faircon
or nicolas or you know these real data
governance i'm not a practitioner
so i talk about data management
holistically
as a practice area especially versus
business intelligence
which i lump everything that isn't data
management into
and kind of bifurcate the space into
determining the truth deriving meaning
data management
business intelligence you know within
data management data governance there's
stewardship data and all those other
things and
there's a lot of debate some of it good
some of it's just kind of echo
chamber-ish around
is data management's data engineering
it's data ops it's it's like
okay making it and using it
when you talk to business i've spent a
disproportionate time
in front of senior leaders at
organizations
they don't care about all that little
minutiae stuff
so it and so i try to help
when they think of data too they don't
think of like data and data analytics
and
artificial intelligence ml auto ml and
all that segmentation is meaningless to
them
because it's not part of what they need
to care about
big picture stuff even just even just
saying okay
you've got analytics business
intelligence that puts data in a
business context to drive action
you've got data management that stewards
and manages and governs that content
so the action that you take is
you're confident in it you gotta again
it's back to this you've got to do both
and i'm always pitching the data
management side
because business intelligence whatever
iteration it is
is super sexy it's got all the heat it
gets all the
spotlight and
and at sometimes pits itself if you want
to get me on a rant here
it pits itself competitively against the
data management side
and i hate that so an example is i've
seen time and time again
analytics leaders stand up and make
ridiculous comments like
it's not about the data it's about the
insight or
data without you know
bi is worthless i'm like
shut up why do you have to make it
competitive why does it have to be
us versus you you're talking about you
know the work that
with the people that i work with you
never hear back to my food analogy
you would never ever hear a baker say
you know flowers worthless until i make
it into bread
because they respect the ingredients
yeah and
i think it's incumbent i mean i'll reach
out here to the data science community
analytics community and say
just stop pitting us against each other
because what the business hears
it hears us bickering and your stuff
isn't any good without our stuff and
i'll
you know i'll take the gauntlet on any
of those bi leaders and go
not so fast i've heckled people
light-heartedly
at conferences who say stuff like that
it's like no it isn't
i want to witness that yeah yeah there
was this
analyst from a premier analyst group and
she's up there
and she's talking on stage about how
okay it's not about the data
it's about the information and this is
kind of where i got this riff from
and she wanted everybody to repeat it
she's like okay repeat after me
it's not about the data it's about the
information and i yelled
no it's stuck it's about both
i like that and what's the point
um yeah totally it's it's like saying
your hands better than your eye versus
your nose it's like
you know yeah it's just like let's get
on with it we need you know we both need
each other
that's why i didn't think on data
storytelling for data management
because as usual i looked at the space
listened to you know data storytelling
is probably the hottest non-technical
thing going on in the data space today
tons of books about it i learned about i
went what's this all about
i look and it's like okay typical hot
thing going on in data
it's about business intelligence it's
about analytics it's about you know
visualization that's great it's
important i got a lot of friends in that
space but i looked at it and went okay
there's an opportunity here to tell a
story about the data
making it versus telling stories
with data and using it and that
distinction
is the definition of my niche
in the space telling about the data
you need both not sophie's choice here
you don't have to choose
every organization needs both kinds of
stories
but if you can't tell a story about why
making data is important to your
organization
you're not going to get the support you
need i see and that's what your book's
really about it's
about the combination of kind of the
start of data
you know caring about our data making
sure our data is structured we have a
plan we understand
what different terms mean we have you
know that single source of truth
and how that influences the data story
that comes out
at the end is is that am i understanding
that right yeah yeah i mean it's you
know it's dead storytelling for data
management as i say on here 99
buzzword free um and just putting that
rationale together in a compelling way
focusing on business alignment
how does what you do or why does what
you do
in data management enable the strategic
intentions of your enterprise where is
your business trying to
go data management will help you get
there
if you believe as i do to my core that
your business is trying to provide value
to your relationships through your
brands at scale
the scale part is hardware software data
if you have data you need data
management
there's a role there's a place for the
data management community
in that statement and in every
organization
and i was inspired by a career of
talking to great data leaders on the
data management side
who had this combination of incredible
passion
for what they were trying to do and
intense frustration
because of the inability for the
organization to understand it
yeah and my place in the space is
being that story helping them tell that
story i don't do that work
i just talk about it yeah so
that sounds that sounds good how how did
you get this
how did you get to this point like how
did you get to that niche
and i guess like what was your career
like to put yourself into this position
how did you get started with data in the
first place
i i starting off in sales so that helps
because if you can't tell a story in
sales you don't make quota
and you're gone so you have to be able
to tell a story my whole family is a
bunch of storytellers my
families and my sister and my
father and mother they all had they were
on pr
public relations i consider myself the
white sheep of the family here
um being just in kind of marketing for
the sales
for for data products but it's it's all
we're all part of the same thing it's
how do you put a story together
whether it's about a product or a
service or idea
but we believe our super powers that we
can convince people of things
that's our family wouldn't you agree i
mean so far you've convinced me
there you go so starting off in sales my
first
job was in data was at a data company
and they
hired me to be a salesperson for this
data product i knew the business
i knew the company because it was part
of another company that i had worked for
publishing company these folks had a
data business that was related to this
magazine
business i was working for the magazine
side i went off but then i
reconnected with the head of the data
part of the business who had
sold that to an organization that
eventually became
nielsen so that's a brand name everybody
knows in the data space
and the first day they came in to teach
me the pitch
and they brought a stack of printouts
you know slides in those days this was
just early i don't think powerpoint was
out yet so it dates me
and they said here let's take you
through the pitch and before they even
opened the book i thought to myself this
thing is way too long
whatever it is i don't care what it is
nothing that
thick should be your story
if you're and it just started from there
so
i was immediately successful at this
data organization
because i could convey what they were
trying to do in really simple direct
ways
and i had to figure it out on my own
because the way they were explaining it
to me was really too complicated
had lots of jargon in it it was really
confusing
it had way too many slides that had way
too many
ideas it didn't have it wasn't grounded
in
the essence of what it did
and i started off in door-to-door
selling so if you can't
hit it immediately you literally get the
door slammed in your face i was b2b
i never did like home selling that's
kind of creepy but i went to businesses
and sold the maps when i got out of
college
that in essence was my first foray into
location data
if you want to back it i like to back
into like it all made sense you know you
kind of like take your
life and kind of yeah oh there's a
through line here but
it's a way to position it so i worked at
this data company and we were
we we changed the nature of the business
i started off as a line sales person i
ended up being general manager of the
entire organization
mostly because i helped reposition and
reconfigure
[Music]
what we did and how you know why it was
important
i didn't really change the product i
wasn't in charge of that so much if
anything i can
help get rid of a bunch of ancillary
things that weren't
directly connected to the core value
proposition
but i used to the story i would tell
about
our change in story was like you know
arm and hammer baking soda
people bought it you know every time
they moved
and uh you'd use it in baking if you did
scratch baking
but the people at arm and hammer started
to realize you know what if we position
this differently let's put it in the
refrigerator let's make it a branded
ingredient let's
literally pour it down the drain you can
buy it for
gene that was all marketing interesting
the product was the same thing they
didn't change
baking soda they changed the way it
could be used
and why it was important and the data we
had at nielsen in the part of the
space the part of the company i was in
we didn't change the data
we changed the story around it primarily
and it it it caught on it was great it
was
it was a blast so i never kind of looked
back and it was a master data service it
was a
master data kind of outsourcing master
file maintenance
it was a it was a universal customer
list
in this case it was start off with every
supermarket in the country we had a list
of every supermarket
and everybody who wants to put a product
in a supermarket needs to know where all
the supermarkets are
they either find them themselves or we
did it for him ah
it was a big fancy list of stores
and uh that's what we did the bit i used
to do is like
you know people would ask my kids what
is your dad doing well he knows where
all the stores are
oh so your mother works
that's kind of what we so we had this
list of stores we built it up into a
database it had hierarchy structure it
had
really clean beautiful classifications
and taxonomies it had standardized
geographies it had a unique identifier
for every location
and you take that and bounce it against
a manufacturer's list and they've got
duplicates they've got misspellings they
got
you know alternate place they got a
bunch of garbage and we cleaned it up
for him
cleaned it structured it and sent it
back okay
we kept it going the
breakthrough was the unique code we had
on every
store became a lingua franca
a common key between parties
that was the huge breakthrough was
seeing that if we had a unique
identifier that people
shared as a de facto standard
then two systems could identify the same
thing the same way
which is what people still want to do
yeah only the scale is bigger that
you know scope is bigger all the rest of
it but the essence of that value
proposition is the same
and so this unique identifier which that
was the part i added i branded it i
called it something i positioned it we
worked you know it wasn't all me but it
was
was you know the team we had and we went
out and
sold the hell out of it because we had a
vision around it we had a purpose for
this
little tiny unique identifier that was
just
in the database anyway and we talked to
a lot of customers
who were starting to tell us stories
about how they used it in ways that we
hadn't
thought of took those ideas
took the non-competitive parts of those
ideas because we did own the product
brought it to other folks and we built a
true network where
every new participant added value to the
rest of our clients
which is a unique ecosystem like play
and we became this common language
between parties in the consumer package
good space
that's pretty cool yeah and it's still
it's still there there's td links is
still there
that's the name of the product it's part
of nielsen it's kind of buried in there
but it still exists 20 this was 1990
567 okay so we're talking er you know
pre
when i was born pre-2k here okay
yeah and but a lot of these basic prime
so for me the challenge was when you
talk about the career
okay how do i take this experience i had
and continue to make it relevant i loved
the space i loved what people
were doing with this i was there for 15
years so i had a great run
i left in the mid 20 teens
and did some consulting to help people
productize and find
other ways to do the same thing because
for the last phase of my career at
nielsen
i got spotted by the ceo a new ceo came
in
from ge and was trying to find some
innovative
you know build an innovation team he
loved the story we had
i actually wrote to him and said hi we
have a small business but we got a great
story
you got to hear about it and this guy
was awesome guy named dave calhoun huge
in my career
he's now running boeing so the guy's
like world class
and he saw the stuff he's like all right
what other ideas do you have
i said i think we can do this thing with
standardized data and apply it to the
other domains nielsen's in
so nielsen has a list of television
stations
it has a list of every program it has a
database of all the brands
it has actually more than enough
databases of all the brands so you
started i went across
nielsen which was really a conglomerate
of dozens and dozens of companies
and started trying to understand okay
what data did they have
what did they code what did they sort
what did they manage
and what i looked for was the
commonality
so if i had come from uh a group that
managed store locations all right i'll
go to another group that's in the media
side okay what do you track we track
movies
all right what do you have what do you
try we have a database of movies
we have a unique code for every movie we
know the producer
we know the the distributor
we know the people in it we know what
kind of movie it is
it's the same thing as what i did for
stores only it's about something
different the domain yeah
when in the media we have a list of ever
you know we got a database of every
magazine
television radio website we know
that they're those different channels
right those are those are
different uh uh modes of media however
they categorize
it we know the ownership we know the
affiliates we have so
what started to happen was i noticed and
i do this today
almost as instinct but it took a while
to kind of learn it
for myself you have a database what's it
about okay in there there's unique
identifiers
there's hierarchies there's taxonomies
and there's geographies
unique identifiers make sure you don't
have duplicates hierarchies parachute
relationship taxonomies category what
kind of thing
things are geographies you know where it
is
and you look across data and go when
doesn't somebody want to know where
something is what it is
who owns it and that it's unique yeah
you get those
foundational parts so
again i'm good at kind of like making
that into something that it's
memorable so i call it the four c's code
company category and country
boom i wish i thought of that 20 years
ago i would have sold a lot more data
that's the work i do try to how to make
that you don't do a data model
or off of my 4cs but you can explain it
to a business person say
this is what we got to start with okay
yeah let's start with this basic basic
basic foundational standardized
structured stuff yeah
that yeah that was a lot i learned a lot
and and something you said kind of made
me
also want to ask you another question
that i didn't send over
in the pre-show notes um but one thing
you said is is we branded it really well
we just talked about the four c's you
know very very flashy
not flashy but very simple catchy thing
you can easily remember
uh so this this podcast that i run data
career podcast
obviously has a lot to do with with data
you know we talked about data governance
we talked a little bit about data
science and analytics
but there's a second word there there's
the career aspect um that i like to
highlight
um and one of the things that i think is
important
and not talked about enough in career
building
is is your personal brand um and so i
want to ask you what what role has
branding and personal branding played a
role
in your career you know i'm just gonna
i'll let you decide where to go with it
but i'll point out at least two things
one the truth hat right that's that's a
staple
and two the the title the data whisperer
that those are two ways i've seen you
use branding
how has branding affected your career
it's it's it's
core i wouldn't have one without it i
think i'd just be just sort of some guy
at a big company
i've been branding myself just
inherently
when i was at nielsen that's where it
really started so i didn't have the
you know the same trappings you know the
date of whisper is
fun i've only picked that up a couple
years ago truth versus meaning i started
to play with that
and you know i got the truth that works
on tv and you know on these
podcasts things like that so that's
wonderful but just
and those are kind of labels to get
really serious
what you know the outside of the package
is kind of the branding
what but what's the product can you
really deliver
you got to have that too i think a lot
of people i'll get to
your question too but just to mention
maybe some advice
is people focus a little bit too much on
the trappings on the labeling
okay let me come up with a cool mono
monik you know um
moniker like the data whisperer and but
you got to have something inside the box
it's not just the label so it's not just
the gimmick you know i've seen
okay i always wear orange socks okay
that's wonderful
how's that been going for you in colvin
by the way with the orange sock
there's people like and that's you know
i respect that for what they do
but if there's not the guts of it if you
don't have a real
intention and a reason for that
it's gonna it's not gonna play it's not
gonna
it's not gonna really take off
early in my career began to realize all
right
it came from sort of mark some marketing
stuff i wrote
articles i had a column in a magazine
back when
people had columns in magazines and
everybody wasn't published only
some people you know the only people
were published were people who the
magazine wanted to publish right so i
had a monthly column in that
that began to really
create a different sort of persona and
what i recognized really quickly was
when i was going into a sales call or a
relationship call
the fact they had read my article gave
them certain preconceived notions that
was
part of branding they understood at
least before i met them
what i stood for
i believe it's important for everyone
the rest of i had a couple key sales
people and we did the
same work for them so they chose
different niches that they could focus
on but we can't begin to build their
personal branding as well before
personal branding was
kind of more of a formal thing not
saying i invented it in any way we just
kind of did it right we sort of did it
now it's got a name
yeah when i went to so at nielsen
inside a company you want to be known
for something if you're
ambitious and if you want you know
a career it's i found it's important to
be known for something
so i became the master data guy the tv
links guy where we went we had pins we
had little lapel pins that we gave
customers but we gave them to we had a
lot of good sort of the branding
trappings down the marketing of it
when i went to d and b
[Music]
i felt i had an objective to change the
nature of how
that company talks about a really
important part of their business
i knew there's no way i could get the
authority to do that
there's no way i could rise in that
company fast enough
get the team that would report to me
get that kind of responsibility and
accountability to say
this is what we're gonna do because i'm
in charge of it i knew that was an
impossibility
what i did instead was just try to build
some influence increase the influence
the story i had about what they did in
master data was better than everything
they were saying that's why they hired
me they didn't even call it the right
thing
i was dealing with marketing people who
were telling me we don't like this idea
of master data can we call it
it's like it's not my idea okay this is
what it's called this is yeah
we do everything we do in this space is
great except for how we talk about it
our own sales force doesn't really
understand it i had a
key client three weeks into the job come
to me and say
i know why i'm buying it but they don't
know why they're selling it to me you
don't ever want to be in the wrong part
of that conversation
yeah so here was a company iconic
company 175 years in the space
created in a lot of ways the basic
tenets of syndicated master data
didn't even have the word on their
website so i had a task in front of me
i was there for a thousand days but
who's counting and
and through
kind of a really intensely focused
branding effort internally created this
story that people began to latch on to i
had sales people calling me going like
this stuff's great this is you know this
is it this nails it i presented to the
sales team
kind of our new master data story and
the typical d and b's
i don't care if d b's on that's fine
they know this anyway whatever
you know 50 slide decks 70 slot 100
slide death
i started off i said okay i've got the
new pitch for you it's 10 slides they
started to applaud already
i didn't even show them like pencil i
said the first one's hello the last
one's thank you so it's really only
eight
and in fact you only need to know this
one
slide if you have only one slide to do
do this one slide it was the five
pillars of
what we did it encompassed the entire
thing
related it to their business related it
to the rest of our business
took a lot of work to boil down because
it's easy to do it in 20 slides
it's not easy to do it in one slide and
that became
you know the the way they they still
talk about it today so the fact that
master days on the dmb websites directly
related to my
influence there to try and get them to
talk about
talk about what they already did in a
way that people could understand it
yeah wow so it's been a big part of your
life
as and i used a lot of techniques that's
why i discovered video
because i realized i can't
i'm not scalable i've got to communicate
this to as many people as possible
5 000 people worked there not that every
one of them needed to know it
they had an extended network because
they had global partners that also
they worked with as a data consortium
had to
who represented them in other countries
had to explain it to them
so i started doing these videos i did
road shows i was all i would talk to
anybody about this
it was like didn't matter who you were i
would talk about it that's where i came
up with the puppets
i started doing puppets it's done in
bradstreet yeah and uh
it was like it's really hard and there
were plenty of people
most people loved it but the advice i'd
give anybody on this if you try this
kind of thing
there are people who are not going to
like you there are people who are going
to go against you
there was somebody at nielsen i just
realized at one point when i was at
nielsen
24 hours a day no matter where i am
somebody in the world is pissed off at
me
[Laughter]
i can't let it get to me you can't win
everybody over
you want to win the right people over
but everybody isn't going to like it and
there were people at dmv because i was
trying to change the nature of how they
talked about what they did
who were against the idea that i would
be doing that
yeah it wasn't my role
apparently or whatever and that conflict
can be pretty aggravating and
and and very distracting but
you just you know if you really believe
in something you got to keep at it
i think that i think that's good advice
i hope i hope everyone who's watching
you know it's still on it's still alive
just kidding um but i hope you guys take
that to heart i mean
uh you were doing that you were doing
puppets
internally yeah they wouldn't let me do
it externally so i had a bee
puppet right my itb if everybody hasn't
seen my puppet show you watch the puppet
show
so there's a character who's an itb but
he started off as dean
b dean b
so you've got d and b dean b ah
exactly so that's the reaction i got
company's been around for you know 175
years
nobody ever thought of that it was like
hidden in plain sight that's just like
lying there deep
they wouldn't let me show it externally
so the marketplace was like no you can't
show this externally can't show this to
any customers
but let me sneak it out but internally
it was the highest ranking
it was the most viewed internal video
of even above like the executive team
holiday greeting video you know which
was mandatory to watch
and this thing just kind of took off
internally and it was
and that became part of my personal
brand internally so i was flying into
zoom calls as dean b people called me
dean people
wore costumes there was a sales meeting
in china where somebody dressed up as a
bee
it just took off i do meetings people
like did you bring the puppet
so that was all part of my personal
branding
you know over dramatic pretty animated
over-the-top kind of stuff but that
preceded me to to sessions
yeah and that helped for sure and it
also helped me a lot with
the people who were against me because
i'm doing this stuff that's really
compelling it makes a ton of sense
and i've got you know puppets and
cartoons and things like that that's
very
it's very difficult to try and talk
people down
from not enjoying that so yeah i think
that works yeah
uh did you just like one day think of
that
or like you're just like one day yeah
i'm gonna try puppets
and see yeah that was it was
the the to get kind of the dnb has
this uh match grade they call it they
take two records and they match them
together okay and then they give you a
score
of how well it matched and that score
was like
12 letters and the different letters
they have are like
b z a f
and they string it out right so i'm
looking at this score and
it's completely meaningless okay i can't
believe they show this to clients i'm
trying to explain
because it's like why do i need to learn
your language but i'm looking at this
thing and it says
the classic sort of example if you said
it out loud which is kind of fun
it said a bosby fosby okay
a ridiculous thing to do so i'm looking
at that going that's like what a b
says that would be a b so i i started
i'm trying to get them to tell the story
differently so i'm making fun of this
yeah and i put a little b character on
the slide when i was talking about it
like an internal meaning
and then it's like oh that character
needs a name and then it like hit me oh
dean b which was just you know i still
get
chills when i remember thinking like
that just sort of comes to you right
that sort of thing just comes to you
then i knew i had to make that into some
sort of character
like how do i animate this puppets are
easier than cartoons
yeah i got some you know dramatic arts
training in case you hadn't noticed
and so it just kind of went from there
and then i had an opportunity because
they had an
internal program where they wanted to do
these videos they wanted people to share
videos on how to
how to be confident literally was like
how do you be confident in dnb
and so i did one of me straight about
working in meetings and that sort of
stuff and then i did one that i just
submitted with the b
to hr i didn't give him any preamble
anything and i sent it to the hr team
who was running this and it was just
like okay
what's going to happen and i called i
called up
somebody i knew there and i said oh i
just want to know if you got the video
she said
we're just screaming here we can't
believe this we can't and it was
it was phil because it was filled with d
and b jokes so it was
total inside baseball
gimmicks i can tell already humor is a
big part of what i do
and i'd come up with these little
comments or snide remarks or things and
i started collecting them and then i
could use them
in this video so it it all kind of came
together it was not all right
let me do a video with a puppet and be
very linear kind of planning
another life experience after you know
however many decades is every idea you
have
may not be used right away every idea
you have
might not be an idea in it on its own it
might be part of something later
jot them down write them down i'm an
evernote fanatic they all go in there
put them in a bucket
and now i'm at a point where okay i've
got to write a script for a b
character for dun and bradstreet i'm
using all these jokes and i just kind of
strung them again
that that's awesome what a cool story
thank you for sharing that
as we move into hour two of your
your lives so that's that's true we're
almost out of time
um but i've definitely learned a lot i'm
just looking at my notes over here
learned about data management data
governance i think branding was a big
thing that you've done
an amazing job at your career um you've
got a channel brand you know
brand is what the web described at the
folks is like
the products what's in your cart but the
brands what's in your heart
it's what you think it's how it makes
you feel
to use the premise of one of the
greatest pitchmen and ever
ever one of my major superhero heroes
don draper of mad men who at least when
he's at work
when he's at home he's not that heroic
but when he's at work
nobody pitches like don draper and he
always talks about
he opens up every pitch with
some form of it isn't about the thing
it's about how that thing makes you feel
and he always goes for that and so
branding is as much
emotion it's how it makes you feel about
it otherwise it's just you know
brown carbonated water or a sandwich or
a car
or you know a person you talk to it's so
much about that emotional element
and that's where a lot of connection
happens with people is on the emotional
level
yeah for sure that's that's a good
lesson to take away
um i guess with the little bit of time
we have left
what is next in the life of scott taylor
what are you up to right now
what are your what are your plans in the
future um
and then and then we'll ask one final
question and just about any advice you
you'd have to give to people after two
two decades of a data career
even more than two decades so what i'm
doing now i do a couple of things one
you know the book last year was my major
creative covid project
i realized after toying with an idea
about a book
if i don't do it now i'm never going to
do it i'm never going to even though the
lockdown wasn't as extended as we all
thought it was going to be in the
beginning
i just knew i am never going to get this
kind of time again
all my events canceled it's like what do
i
you know i don't have any excuses the
only excuse i have now for not writing
the book
is you know i'm lazy slob i won't
you know there was nothing left that
could keep me from writing so i just
bear down and write it so this year i'm
doing a virtual
book tour i'm presenting to 30 right now
i'm up to
33 dama chapters damn is the data
international data management
association they've got
chapters all over the world i did
wisconsin and new england today i did
two of them as
webinars i'm doing uruguay and ecuador
next week
i've done probably 20 of them so far
i've got more to do throughout the year
and i'm scheduling that's really fun
i do a session for them that's sponsored
by my two sponsors winshuttle and
and comma group who are kind of
sponsoring the content i do
this year my biggest creative project
will be more puppets
so i've been talking about it for a
while if you talk to kate and susan
they're going to go yeah you've been
talking about puppies winning but i'm
working on it all those little ideas i
told you about they're all going into a
bucket
i'm looking at them what new characters
i can come up with
i see crazy stuff going on in linkedin
where somebody explains something in
like a highly technical way
i grab that comment stick it in my
little evernote and go
okay i'm gonna flush with that a little
bit and make it into puppet dialogue
because i could never come up with those
words
so i've got a multi-episode
puppet series coming
that yeah it would be a lot of work but
it's really
it's starting to shape up here i got
some guest voices and some different
characters and
a simple story it's a story we all go
through it's just a bunch of folks at an
enterprise
they want to make their data work and it
doesn't
and how do they do it they hire a
consultant they look at tools they
try and dabble in data science they try
and fix the culture
and hilarity ensues
in the data puppet world so more to come
on that for sure but that's my biggest
project
and i'm available on netflix soon is
that is that correct
it's on netflix but it'll be on linkedin
and youtube and yeah
even better wearing on a device near you
but it's probably
all by the time i get it all finished
but it'll be here in the uh in the
studio i've got a couple new characters
i've bought
i've got to figure out how to dub
people's voices in because i don't
expect some of these guest voices to be
able to do their own puppet work so i'm
working
on that some green screen stuff so i'm
stretching a lot of myself
technically very cool which is really
fun yeah i'm really i can't believe i'm
at this point that i could just do
literally
only the stuff that i found really fun
in my whole career
and just focus on that yeah that's
awesome
yeah the advice i have is the same
advice you know find what you're find
what you're good at
find really i mean if i had to look back
you know
tell my 20 year old self stuff it would
be
probably two things one pack lighter
that's an important no matter who you
are
pack light okay like metaphorically or
physically
metaphorically but also importantly
physically
pack light i'm still trying to get that
right
and if you can figure out what you're
good at
really focus on it and try and lean into
that i'd look back and go
you know i i didn't realize
kind of the difference i could make i
didn't realize that
i did comic strips for
in sales when i was just a line sales
person i found a mentor
who did the same kind of creative stuff
i did at one of these companies i worked
at
and he and i you know i mean he was
delighted to find me
i was amazed to find him but if i had
kind of realized that that ability
was as different as it ended up being i
would have focused more on it
i think in a way and really gotten to
the point i am today earlier
rather than dealing with some of the
stuff i dealt with or trying to be
kind of a manager of a business and
dealing with the finance side and i mean
all those things are important it's just
not my
skill set so if you can find what you're
really good at
man lean into it and be as good at it as
you possibly can
that's that's awesome advice so
hopefully everyone watching
find what you're good at lean into it
and you'll you'll end up wearing a truth
hat someday
or you're a version of that whatever
your version of that
yeah i i love it well awesome thank you
so much scott
for joining us everybody it was a blast
yeah
thank you i wanted to make sure that we
we read robert's comment here he says
buy
scott's book um
which is what happens when i met francis
ford coppola a great iconic
storyteller who i met at a data
conference
so it was a convergence of so many
things
so if you together have a reason to buy
you're telling your data story now
now you have a reason i asked francis
ford coppola
what makes a good story oh that that
that makes sense
and we can catch you at the master data
marathon end of september
right or okay and or on
youtube or soon on the meta meta
consulting website
where i'm putting literally everything
i've done over the last couple years
it's really exciting all these videos
podcasts
interviews blogs both sides of the mic
puppet shows
cartoons got to put it all someplace
because linkedin is
kind of transitory yep and uh yeah i
think
just doing this for people if they want
help and this kind of stuff
buy the book reach out to me whatever
whatever it helps everybody's got a
story to tell
gotta tell it that's true that's true
well well awesome thank you scott
thanks to everyone who is listening i
know jared and robert and owner
uh thank you guys for your comments and
we'll catch you guys
actually i'll be on linkedin live later
tonight doing ask avery show so
i'll see you guys later tonight all
right thanks everyone
thank you so much all right cheers

Title: Matthew Sharp: Engineer to Data Scientist to Data Engineering?!?

Description: Come join and listen to Matthew Sharp talk about his data career. We will talk about:
- His transition from engineer to data scientist
- His transition from data scientist to engineer
- Why he uses LinkedIn 
- His advice for breaking into data science 

The audio from this interview will then be available on the Data Career Podcast. If you enjoy data in any way, shape, or form, give the Data Career Podcast a listen!

#Data #BigData #Engineering

Video Transcript:
what's up everyone
this is uh avery smith on a
let's see what night is it this is a
thursday night at 8pm
and uh i'm super excited we have a great
guest today on the data career podcast
we have uh matthew sharp matt do you go
by matt or matthew i guess
matt's fine just whatever is easier
okay sweet awesome i'm really excited to
have matt he's someone i've wanted to
have on the podcast
even even when the podcast didn't exist
yet
i had talked to matt and i was like hey
i want to do a podcast i'd love to have
you as guests that was like maybe
january or february this year
and then it just took me a while to get
to the podcast but here we are
matt's one of the first guests um just a
quick intro on matt
um matt's a chemical engineer turned
data scientist
turned data engineer in his past life he
was a data scientist for i am flash
that's intel and micron uh company
and now he is currently a data engineer
at nmx
an awesome innovative fintech company in
lehigh utah which is really close to me
that's another thing is matt's from utah
i'm also from utah
uh he's king of linkedin polls
i i have proclaimed him that and uh in
my opinion he's one of the
the best and most underrated data people
on linkedin
so welcome to the data career podcast
matt thanks for having me
it's happy to be here yeah it's kind of
freaky
how somewhat similar um our
paths have been because we both started
as chemical engineers
and then moved into the data sphere i
guess why did you choose
chemical engineering in the first place
um because i was
wanting punishment i guess
so i just always loved chemistry
and i was always really good at math so
i figured if i joined them
together and became a chemical engineer
things would be
i would just have fun but uh
and don't get me wrong like i love the
classes and
i met tons of awesome students and other
things like that
um i was actually uh the president of
the aiche
organization at byu oh wow
um for those who don't know aich is like
a
career chemical engineering club it's
actually the largest club at byu
and oh what
other things people don't know is like
the whole byu's career fair is
completely
put together at aacg um
and so uh anyway so
there's there's kind of a lot of perks
that come from that history of achieving
that but yeah no it's i was i love
chemical engineering
okay so you like chemistry and math you
loved chemical engineering
you liked the classes um then
then i guess what happened if you liked
it
why aren't you doing it now what
happened
so i guess i guess the thing is is you
know once you get into industry
like you'll just never be as challenged
as you are
at school uh you know for the for the
most part the problems you need to solve
aren't
aren't really long math problems uh
they're kind of more
just basic um
you know human problems and
communication and
you know i first started as a process
engineer and
i you learn the processes behind it but
um for the most part you know you're
just making small incremental
improvements running certain experiments
and things like that
and so you know i just found myself
uh like always having small
data problems and so
like one of the things you'll see in
industry is that
you know you know i was in semiconductor
industry and so
like we had vendors that build these
very complicated tools for us
and there's only a couple vendors
you know for any individual tool and
generally you're going to pick the one
that has the best process
but not necessarily the one that has the
best software
and so um like
a one one of the pieces of software i
worked with was a program called clarity
and this thing was written maybe 20 30
years ago and pretty much hasn't been
updated since
and so i it was just a real struggle
very poor ux and user experience and
user interface and so
i just found myself building these small
tools to slowly kind of automate
oh i'm going to pull data from here i'm
going to delete it from here and then
all of a sudden
like it just kind of led to me
building programs and software that uh
really required you know kind of
automating what
uh engineer does you know a chemical
engineer
and that's not necessarily you know a
simple
you know ad subtracts you know i was
quickly finding myself reaching towards
machine learning especially when it came
to processing images and
other things like that oh interesting so
you're doing
were you doing a decent amount of
process or image processing there
yeah so um i worked in the rda
department there
and so rda stands for real-time defect
analysis
and so pretty much my entire job was
looking at
thousands of send images so images of
these
defects you know at the micro scale
and so it was yeah so
kind of processing understanding the
processes behind what
might cause those certain type of
defects but yeah
okay that's pretty interesting and i
guess i guess what year did you graduate
um i graduated in 2013.
okay and then did you work for uh i am
flash right after that
yeah so i had an internship with them
and
got a full-time offer and went to work
with them
oh so you did an internship i guess that
would have been the summer of 2012.
yeah exactly dude you know what you know
what's so funny
um i was supposed to be an intern and i
am flash
in 2012 yeah i
i actually this is kind of a funny story
um like
i guess even from like my freshman year
it um
we're both from utah matt went to byu
which is
which is in provo utah and i went to the
university of utah
which is in salt lake city utah and
they're separated maybe by like 40
minutes 30 minutes
um and i mean we're we're
we're pretty close to each other like i
grew up always going to byu stuff
he's probably been to university of utah
stuff um they're pretty
they're pretty integrated schools in a
lot of ways um
anyways so i and also utah is not a huge
market for chemical engineers
there is there's a few refineries here
but there's just not a whole lot of
chemical engineering jobs in utah
so the the pickings are pretty slim
and so even my freshman year i really
wanted to work for im flash that was
like my goal i want to work for im flash
i want to work for
i am flash um and they
they my sophomore year i i think i came
pretty close in the interview process
they like notoriously like only want
juniors right
but my sophomore year i got to go to
dinner with them at the career fair and
they were interested
didn't get it then my junior year i
ended up getting the internship
but but anyways i accepted it and
everything
um this is probably in like november the
career fair is probably like in october
or something like that right
i accepted it november and then i ended
up
getting an internship offer from exxon
in april and ended up ditching iron
flash and i still feel bad
to this day about it uh but i was
supposed to be there that summer we
would have been friends
oh we definitely love that a lot earlier
than we have now
yeah yeah so it's so funny because i
mean it's just funny how our
how our lives could have could have
changed could have been a lot different
um i am flash doesn't even really exist
anymore that's another funny thing
how do you feel about that um
i mean i left it i'm okay with it yeah
you were kind of gone for
how many years have you been gone now
from iron flash uh
so i left a year and a half ago so
i so i left right
before iron flash was taken over by
micron
and yes so i literally the only day i
worked for micron is when i turned in my
badge
oh there you go um okay and i guess
so now now you work for mx can you tell
us a little bit about mx and what they
do
uh so mx is kind of a leader
in the fintech space and
really we do so much so it might just be
easier to talk about what my team does
and so uh my team is the data
enhancement team
and so we work with a transactional data
so if you went to your bank statement
and you were to look at the records you
can see that transactional data
you'll usually see like some big long
stream
kind of describing okay
you know you bought something from
mcdonald's and
like it would have a bunch of weird
numbers and x's and other things like
that
usually it's a very kind of
fluff data in there to have like an
amount in there and other things like
that
and so a lot of what my team does is
so what so mx we aggregate a lot of data
and so um
and we have like a personal finance
management tool
and so uh but if if you
if you want and to use any of your
finance data
you need to hook it all up and then kind
of
what our system does is we clean and
categorize
and just overall improve it so we do
things like we
so that big long mcdonald's string just
becomes mcdonald's
uh we one of the things i've been
working a lot on is adding location data
to that so i want to just tell you
mcdonald's to tell them
it's this mcdonald's at this location
um it would then categorize that as this
is a fast food transaction
so then you can then go in and use the
personal finance manager to say
oh i want to set limits on how much i'm
spending on fast food or other things
like that
and so uh a lot of what we're doing is
helping
the end user manage their finances and
to to get better and become more
financially strong
oh that's that's really interesting i
didn't realize like you said mx does a
lot of things
i didn't know mx did that um it's
have you ever heard of mint from intuit
yeah it sounds pretty similar to mint um
is is is mx's product free or what does
it cost
uh so mx uh we do business to business
with uh so generally
the banks who do business with us offer
these tools to them for free i see
yeah so it's one way that things stay
competitive by
having these ad advocacy tools is what
they're called
yeah okay okay
that makes sense so it's you guys sell
basically to banks and then banks can
offer it
as a service to their their customers
one way or another
okay that makes sense i did i did want
to say uh hello to joe
he's he's also another another utah data
guy he said hello
i just want to say hi joe he's he's
coming on the podcast later in june
i'm excited for that um okay so that's a
little bit about what you did
at i am flash a little bit about what we
did at mx
um and i guess i guess we didn't really
talk about
um i guess when you got recruited or
whatever however you left
imflash and went to mx um did you know
you're going to be
doing data engineering
yeah so i knew that i was making the
switch
uh actually when i was interviewing with
uh mx they're like
you know you're a data scientist now and
you know we could definitely use a lot
of that experience but
it seems like you also have a lot of
actual engineering experience and you've
built a lot of
programs and done a lot of coding you
know would you
be interested in becoming a data
engineer and so
and and i was and so i made the switch
when i moved over to mx
and so i was actually
i think by title i was actually the
first data engineer here at mx
and so uh it was
definitely very interesting being
the first of something at a company
because i was given a lot of
opportunities to kind of define my role
and to help
move mx in certain ways and directions
that i
might not get and at other opportunities
did you did you get that experience at
im flash
uh no
yeah i i guess i guess uh how did you
what was the
culture like at im flash like how did
you feel like that differs from what you
kind of just described at mx
so like it's funny because i am flash no
longer exists so i can talk bad about
them as much as i want right
yeah yeah for sure i mean who's gonna
get mad at you none of them
not the whole company doesn't exist
anymore i i talk about it i talk about
about exxon and they still exist so
no i would say overall like i'm flash
was actually
a really good company however it is a
larger company
um i mean even though essentially it's
just the one fab it was
a joint venture between intel and micron
and they had
a lot of say in influence over the
culture of iron flash
um and so it
ultimately was just it's a bigger
company you know they kind of hire you
to do
something and they expect you to do that
thing
and i was always getting in trouble for
doing
other things i
tend to be a rebel i tend you know
when i see uh
the system is broken i tend to want to
fix the system
instead of trying to work within the
system and so
um generally it's always worked out for
me
just simply because i've been able to do
that you know a lot of
the you know programs and software i
built at iron flash
literally did save millions right and so
you know there's always kind of a
conflict of interest where a manager was
always really happy with the work i did
but
it wasn't what they asked me to do so
that can obviously and i don't
necessarily recommend
people following my footsteps in this
way but wait why not
uh well i meant it it just led to
conflict that didn't necessarily need to
be there right
so when
yeah just i mean didn't it make a
difference though didn't you save
millions
yeah and i've made people's life happier
and less stressful
and yeah so you know i don't regret my
decisions but
there's definitely conflict there yeah
it's
it's interesting um i i found a very
similar experience
between working for vapor sense which
was the first company
i did data science for very small
company less than 20 employees
i definitely wasn't the first data
science hire there um
but i was the only data science person
there for a while
um and then versus exxon which obviously
is huge
and yeah like you said i felt like at a
smaller company i could do kind of like
choose the direction
i had a lot more freedom there's a lot
more flexibility to kind of do cool
things and take on cool projects
versus at exxon they pretty much just
hired me to be like a monkey
and they're like spin the wheel here you
go
and like i was gonna say i was about to
say good job you're spinning the wheel
but i don't even feel like they ever
really did that um i
had a hard time like i don't feel like
and and like you said like you would
save the company millions and they're
like
uh good no not good job because you
didn't do you didn't spin the wheel
you got to spin the wheel matt um so i'm
glad
that you feel like you have that that
freedom at least a little bit more of
that freedom
at mx um
what else what else like how else do you
feel about like mx's culture
um compared to i am flash because it's a
it's a different industry right like i
would say you're in fintech right now
and you used to be in like semiconductor
manufacturing
what's the difference in the uh in the
culture
i would say there's a lot of differences
um i honestly think
uh like i love working for max and
anyone who's interested
definitely look into nmx like we
uh this was just announced but we were
just
awarded like inc magazine's best places
to work
so mx has constantly won you know best
places to work
awards in utah and these last two years
we've won awards nationally
for one of the best places to work
and it really is like the people here
are amazing
but you know also now
uh you know i say that because i was the
first data engineer but it's true of
every job there's a lot of yeah
opportunities to learn and grow
and just kind of move the company in the
direction it needs to go
and to have all your voices heard
and so things like that i love it
yeah i i think it's awesome and yeah
like like you said i've never worked
there but i've heard really good things
about it
i saw you guys vr headsets that they
give you
pretty jealous about that um i i think
one thing i've noticed
from you know going from an engineer to
data scientist
i mean there's data science for instance
i was a data scientist at exxon
but you definitely as you go to these
tech companies there's definitely
a different vibe than there is at some
of these older
more traditional engineering
manufacturing companies
um you just you just don't have as many
of the perks like i never got a vr set
from exxon mobil
you know they they wanted to be
workplace flexible but they weren't
really
um yeah
it's funny that you mentioned that right
because when is that iron flash like
when there's a big person they had free
food thursday
and oh and then they ended up
canceling it because it was too
expensive because people were taking
more than one banana or whatever
yeah then you go to one of these you
know
kind of more millennial tech companies
and they just have like
open fridge and open pantries and you
know when i was
in the office there was literally a
freezer full of ice cream right behind
me that i could tape as much as i wanted
and just
yeah like you know it's just like it's
definitely different
and part of that is the industry
difference right fintech versus
manufacturing but a lot of that comes
down to
a cultural difference as well and
and even when i'm working at home yeah
they sent us vr headsets so we could
have this
awesome virtual meeting uh which was
amazing
and and since then we've continued to
have like team building exercises like
actually right before
this podcast i was playing beat saber
with my co-workers so
wow yeah so it's kind of funny that you
mentioned
all right yeah the vr headset so yeah
that's that's hilarious um okay so
with with this role you have at mx
you're now a data engineer
um i'm actually gonna take one step back
i'm gonna
talk a little bit more i'm gonna ask you
a little bit more about the transition
from engineer data scientist what
like i guess what do you feel like
worked out for you like what went well
and what advice would you give to people
who are transitioning into data science
um you know i say this all the time but
everyone i see
that's effectively made the switch has
done
lots and lots of projects um data
science
projects and so um
you know i had the opportunities to be
able to work on
the side projects at my work which was
beneficial
and i think you know everyone works with
data
and so you know really that's something
that anyone can do
um it just kind of takes
a different mindset and frame
of reference to start thinking
like a data scientist and you know i was
you know i was constantly being told oh
we can never do this we can never do
that and
then just i would go and do it and
uh you know like a lot of my projects i
worked on that were just uh
it was like a side project that people
started using
and then i would convince my manager to
give me more time to work on it full
time
and a lot of times these side projects
uh
like i remember one of my projects was
uh
you know i took two weeks to build it um
you know at least the framework and
uh once i started showing it to people
and people started to
use it uh you know people were like hey
you're you just built something that
this other guy's been working on for two
years
you know or like there's this whole
other team and committee that's been
trying to build it for two years
it's like oh okay
it was like oh i guess i stepped on
people's toes but
people like my tools so i'm gonna keep
working on it and
then you know after a while you know i
had a ton of traction and they had none
so then you know my tool got adopted
you know and so uh
so yeah i would just say you know it
doesn't matter if you see someone else
working on something it doesn't matter
uh if you think something is impossible
like
just just try it like just go out like
if
if you have you know especially if you
can work on
a problem that you personally face
you're going to be so much better at
trying to solve that problem
and so that that's most of all my
my main problems is you know i i just i
just wanted to pull this data
easier right so then i built a tool to
pull it and then
you know and then okay now i want to
analyze it now that i have the data
it just slowly would build on top of
each other
step by step yeah okay i liked i liked a
lot what you said there um
i i liked the the fact that you said you
know everyone works with data everyone
everyone touches data one way or another
you know if you guys go through you know
an entire week
without touching excel well then maybe
well okay
i guess i go kind of maybe a week now
without touching excel
you get the idea like like people they
touch tables of numbers pretty often and
if they're not
maybe they should be but you need to
figure out how to change your mindset
and look at those numbers differently
because you said you have to think like
a data set like it's like a data
scientist it's like almost a mindset
versus a job title right
i i honestly believe that for sure like
uh it's you know
you just you just got to get your hands
dirty and mess with data
and you know face the problems that that
data has
you know as as you there are just
certain things that everyone who's faced
you know data you'll know you know like
i just
posted about it yesterday about you know
like outliers right
like that was one one of my first
projects was
how do how do i clean outliers or
whatever different things and so
you know i i reprogrammed you know
pierce's algorithm and grubs algorithm
and just
all of these different you know outlier
detectors
and i ran it across a bunch of different
data sites to get to understand
how they work specifically with the data
i was working with
at time flash you know and so that and
that
and that gave me you know a whole new
world of insight you know and then
you know and then you can start you know
and those are kind of common
ones and then you can start moving into
maybe machine learning like you can use
k-means clustering to find out layers
and you can use
you know other a lot of other methods
out there
and so anyways
what where where did you find all that
stuff though you're like oh i just
learned that
what what did you do to learn that uh
wikipedia
yeah honestly it was just you know if
you go to wikipedia and look up outliers
you're gonna like throughout the article
you're gonna find
lots of different algorithms out there
that learn it and
you can then go into those ones
uh if like the pierce's criterion
uh i remember specifically like they
actually have the code written out
and like python and r i believe and so
oh wow i needed it in a language i was
using like jsl
and so i reprogram or like programmed it
in my own language and
learn tongue that way and so yeah
um i i'm gonna go on a small
tangent there how awful is jsl on a
scale of one to ten
i actually really love json
no no
why so i'm like a jump fanboy
okay i like jump too but i don't like
jsl let me let me just say that
no like it's fine completely fine i
understand
um so jsl is for those who don't know
it's the scripting language behind
jump programming language so similar to
how like vba is for excel
and so i actually
um so i spent years like
on jump forms learning jsl
and and commenting on other people's and
teaching them jsl
i'm i would when i left i am flash i was
actually
like one of 12 super users at jump
because of my contributions
and teaching people how to use json so
uh i wonder i wonder if you've commented
on any of the questions i've posted in
the
community forum maybe i
had a couple that's for sure where were
you at the um
at the jump conference in 2019
you didn't get to go uh i never
so like that was one of the things i
didn't like about iron flash is
like in order to like go to conferences
you had to
be like an e5 or something like that
yeah
find you and so on uh
i just yeah so i've never been to a jump
conference and most of that is just
because i'm
i'm petty and so i didn't want to pay
myself but
oh it's expensive yeah i was constantly
encouraged
to go and i spend a lot you know
supporting
kind of the jump community as well but
still
not not much anymore now that i no
longer use it
i think i think that's a big problem
with jump is that
you know it's it's expensive so yeah
um yeah like matt said it's a product
that's from sas
sas um and it's like
it honestly is really good it makes
visualization really easy with drag and
drop
and also makes like machine learning
really easy with drag and drop
they use it at im flash and they also
use it at exxon mobil
um but one seat one license of jump for
an individual user
is like 2 000 a year which which
honestly could be worth it for for some
people
um but it's not worth it for me i don't
pay for it
um and they don't have any free version
other than other than if you're in
school so if you're in college
and you're listening to this check out
see if you have a free jump access
we did we did it at uh university of
utah and at georgia tech
um do you know if byu has it
i'm i'm not sure yeah
yeah yeah i didn't i didn't i didn't use
it while i was at the u
um but since then i found out we had
access to it
that's that's funny man i did me i did
meet there was only one person from iron
flash there
in 2019 when i was in tucson um i didn't
i didn't meet him
um okay sorry that was just a little
side side no i
do like jump yeah no i think honestly if
it wasn't
expensive i would i would totally be
pushing mx to get jumped
i think i i definitely think like
jump is a great program for people to
learn about data
to learn about statistics to learn about
design of experiments
to learn about like you said machine
learning you know it's just
a couple click of the buttons and you
can build
you know a tree based
machine learning algorithm and so
a lot lots of good stuff there do you
think
do you think that's kind of the future
of of data professionals
so i'll give you an example um we're
seeing a bunch of i mean i would
consider jump
it's mostly a statistical software
people have used it for stats for
you know 30 years just turned 30. um
but but now data science is coming out
machine learning's coming out people are
more excited about that
and i would almost call it a no code
machine learning platform
almost um we're seeing more of those pop
up we have ben taylor
also a utah data guy he works for data
robot that's probably one of the biggest
no code machine learning platforms i get
like
a linkedin message a day with some
obscure company
asking me to if i'm interested in their
no code machine learning platform
is is that where we're gonna go is no
code machine learning no code data
engineering
like what what what do you see the
future of data professionals being
i mean people
like when it comes to no code um
like like people have been stressing
like no code
websites forever right and you have
tools like wix and
um just you know tons of blog
tools to you know no code build websites
um and you can do a lot like from
e-commerce to blogs
et cetera however you know all the
companies that are really worth anything
built their home tech stack you know and
so
um like there's definitely a place for
when it comes to like no code machine
learning um
but
yeah you know like like it gets to a
point you know when
if you want to do something new if you
want to do something revolutionary
you're you're going to get you're going
to have to get your hands dirty in the
code
yeah i i agree with you i definitely i
think i think looking to web development
as an example
is is the best thing to do because there
is really good no code
website building but like you said it's
not like
you know like espn or like google
you know are built on are built on wix
or squarespace
right like they they have complex
stuff going on so of course these no
code machine learning platforms
are go like for instance i i have a
couple websites i'm not good at building
websites
from scratch programmatically so i use
some of these you know
these no code solutions and they're
awesome they help me build websites you
know
i'm just a little fish and i think
that's what it's going to do
to give you know power to little fish
but i think you know like you said if
you wanna do something revolutionary
we gotta we gotta there there will
always be a need for data engineer and
data scientist to
programmatically innovate one way or
another
so i think i think we're on the same
page there um
okay so let's let's move a little bit to
to your linkedin headline i think it
says recovering data scientists right
tell me what that's all about like data
science or data engineering
choose one i'm definitely going to
choose data engineering
um okay why yeah i guess
you know as far as that title goes we're
covering data
scientists i think like there was
you know a big shift in my mind between
you know i used to look out at everyone
doing
all these cool projects and just being
super jealous was like oh i want to work
on that you know no matter how cool the
current project i was working on
you know you can always see these cool
data science projects out there
you know you know from
building bots to you know beat starcraft
or go
or you know whatever like you know to
you know self-driving cars or you know
there's always very fascinating
problems and there's definitely kind of
this
you know thought especially among
younger
data scientists data analysts etc where
you know they just want to build really
cool stuff
and you know there was you know when i
started moving towards data engineering
you know you're working on a lot more
boring problems to be honest like it's
not as cool
however the stuff you're doing is a lot
more
valuable and so there was just this
shift and mindset of oh i want to build
cool stuff i want to provide a lot of
value to my company
or you know for for mx you know we're
we're providing a lot of value to you
know the end users to people who are
trying to become more financially strong
and so
there's you know just a lot more value
to the world in general
and so and so that was kind of
my shift in thinking and
i i would say a lot of my skill sets
uh kind of proved better in data
engineering you know i was always trying
to
harness my craft and become better at
programming
and you know as a data engineer you're
going to be programming a lot more
as a data scientist
[Music]
but i still feel pretty flexible i think
i could
you know i'm often helping my data
scientists uh
mags you know with with their different
machine learning problems
um and so i i still feel pretty flexible
but
there's definitely a shift between
as a data scientist i would be doing a
lot more statistics and kind of
experiments and as a data engineer i'm
definitely doing a lot of more
infrastructure and programming in
general so
yeah i think i just think about you like
a couple years down the road
and just think about how well-rounded
you're going to be i mean oh my gosh
like you have the data science
background and then you're getting this
really good data engineering background
i mean you could go either way and the
experience you've had in the past would
be so useful
um and either way because like you said
you know data data engineers aren't
necessarily good data scientists and
good data scientists aren't necessarily
good data engineers
but i think when you've you've kind of
gone and straddled both sides it's going
to be really helpful to you
um i do agree with you by the way that
that data engineering is like the more
mundane boring tasks
i think that's true that's why i will
never be a data engineer day of my life
um but but like you i think you brought
up a good point
that like data scientists are often like
kind of like always chasing the newest
flashiest
sports car right like in terms of
projects
you're like oh yeah i'm gonna do this
and you're just trying to do it fast and
bring value
but you often don't like put down that
foundation that like is going to make
the sports car like last
four years and work like correctly
and like smooth like a lot of my
projects
they work but like the car sounds like
it's like stuck in like first gear the
whole time
it's like it's going forward and it's
going fast but it's like
losing bolts and nuts on the way and
like we have to patch it
as we go and i feel like i feel like
that's what a data engineer's job is
basically like
okay slow down like let's have a
structured
pipeline for this like you like put more
of a foundation would you would you say
that analogy is true
yeah i wouldn't you know a lot of what i
stress to
our data scientists is you know let's
let's make sure that
you know your model is repeatable like
we can rebuild it
like you can you know really understand
it
you know and i think
you know it it's really not that much
work
more work to kind of go that extra step
to
turn your running car into something
that's more stable
and more you know reliable but
it's definitely something i feel a lot
of data scientists kind of
uh try to you know skip over you know
they're
moving on to the next problem a little
bit too too quick
yeah i i agree um
okay with that um
let's talk about let's talk about
linkedin okay
you're you you how often do you post on
linkedin
um so i try to post every workday
at least once monday through friday
okay why
uh
i i guess you know there's a lot of
different reasons why
um part of it is you know
i want to give back uh you know i i've
been
i was a browser of linkedin for years
you know
i learned a lot from from people like
ben taylor and joe reeds
you know always were making me post and
were local and
i met them at meetups et cetera um
and so you know and so i want to
give back those things i learned to
other people uh the other aspect is
is you know i i posted on linkedin a few
times
and then you know they tell you kind of
who saw your posts
and it showed me like almost everyone
was like from either hang flash or mx
right
and so it was just like oh you know like
this is
you know whenever i post the most people
who
you know when i was first starting
especially were people in
my own company and and so
you know one of the things you'll find
in any job is kind of
kind of get a little siloed a little bit
by
who you interact with at work i mean
you're going to know your team a lot
better than
other teams around you and you know the
further away in the organization
someone is the less influence you have
over them so
you know i i don't know if i have a
whole lot of influence in sales
at mx or in hr or
in the c-suite you know and so posting
on linkedin gives me a way
for those people to see some of the
things i'm talking about and to have a
greater influence over
over linkedin and uh ever since i've
been posting
you know i i've always been surprised
you know
because a lot of what i post um i
kind of post you know like if me and a
data scientist are having a conversation
something's interesting you know like
that that is something i like to post
about
and so like so my posts tend to
tend to be kind of a sneak peek behind
the curtain
for for those who want to know what like
real data engineers and data scientists
try to
solve and that's why i think even though
so like i don't necessarily get a whole
lot of new people or like
new analysts or or scientists really
gravitating towards my content however i
do see a lot of
more senior people rather gravitating to
my content
and so um anyway so so that's a large
part of why i post on linkedin is to
kind of give that influence it's it's
such an
underrated uh
it's such an underrated version of
networking people are always like i'm
networking for my external
you know find my next job find people
you know work at amazon
or tesla or something like that what you
talked about was
more like internal networking networking
within people
inside your company that like you've
never really talked to you know but you
have this thing in common that you both
work for mx
and it gives you exposure to them and uh
exposure to you you know
um i think that's that's so interesting
and that can be really powerful i mean i
don't know about mx but exxonmobil was
always like
bring down the silos like tear down the
walls of
like your team and like get out and talk
to other people and a bunch of other
like crap that it's nice to say they
didn't ever like really do that much to
do it right
and linkedin is a way you tear down the
silos because
there's like there's some like arbitrary
algorithm that's like
giving up posts left and right and we
don't really like you know matt you
don't decide who that
that note goes out to you know it can be
seen by
you know the lowest people at mx or the
highest people at mx you have no idea
and you don't have like any say in it
and so i think it really does kind of
like democratize
speaking within a company which is so
weird because you never think about
like linkedin internally inside of a
company so
i think i think that's a really
interesting point have you have you had
experiences at mx where like
someone comes up to you and like oh yeah
i've seen your linkedin posts
uh yeah i mean i've actually had that
both in mmx and had other places
uh you know or people like oh hey i saw
your post i thought it was really
interesting
or you know you go across
and someone's talking about your post or
or
not necessarily about your post but
about the topic and so
and and you realize that yeah you know
what you're talking about
has an influence and is able to help
other people
i mean one of the things i you know i do
like to
post you know kind of interview tips
both
from like interviewee and interviewer
uh side of it and you know that was
something
that really helped me gravitate towards
you know like hr
recruiters here at mx and they've taken
notice and so i've been able to
come better friends with them and now
they like to set me up and interviews
whenever they can
which is great because i love getting
interviews and
um and and kind of meeting people
um and uh you know and so
there's definitely uh posting on
linkedin has
had been beneficial beneficial um
you know my when i was younger i had a
brother-in-law
who taught me you know like there's
entrepreneurs but then there's also
entrepreneurs
and and you know posing on linkedin i
think helps me as an entrepreneur
you know someone who's trying to make uh
you know have more influence and to you
know
you know grow mmx as well as grow my own
career
so that's awesome
i think that's a very unique take very
very refreshing take
um okay last question um
uh here and we should we should have
done this at the beginning
but i want to end on this just because
we'll tease it we'll tease it to the
people and we'll say you have to watch
to the end if you want to
if you want to see this um data
engineering is something that's new
has the word data in it and it has the
word engineering in it
those are like two different things um
in like
30 seconds or less tell the people
what data engineering is because there's
probably a lot of people don't know
oh man 30 seconds or less yeah it's very
fast gotta be quick
i i you know it's ever about two minutes
definitely difference um you know i
you know it's everything that comes with
kind of the automation of data
i think is my 32nd or one sentence
aspect of it so a lot of what i do is
build
machine learning pipelines um
you know working specifically with data
scientists uh
i at other companies this might be
called a machine learning engineer
um uh you know i i have co-workers who
spend a lot of time
uh you know with data engineering title
that spend a lot of time building
data pipelines etls uh working with data
warehouses
um you know they're more concerned with
moving data and storing data
um you know it's
you know kind of one of the ways i often
say is you know like data scientists are
always working in a vertical
right like they're pro you know they're
worried about problems like fraud
or self-driving car or you know just
like one specific problem
you know and that's and the data around
that while engineering is
much more lateral you know we want to
build things that
solve you know tools and
that solve the problems for not just you
know for
fraud as well as you know for
self-driving cars as well as for
you know you know the image detection
and you know whatever maybe you write so
um that's kind of how i see it
i think i think that's a great answer um
and i think i think people will
appreciate
that um well well awesome thank you so
much matt it's been super fun to get to
know you we've never talked
uh i'm gonna call this face-to-face uh
whatever
it's it's the new normal face-to-face i
guess we've never talked to face-to-face
although we've interacted quite a bit on
linkedin it's good to to meet you i
guess
um and yeah hopefully once all this
pandemic stuff is over
it looks like it's coming to an end
we'll go we'll go hang out and
lehigh and do something sometime yeah
absolutely we'll have to grab lunch for
sure
yeah well thank you so much for joining
us guys this is this is matt sharp
um go connect with them on linkedin if
you're not connected with them
um go go follow his posts
he has really interesting things like he
said about data about
interviewing about careers about resume
um
go go go give him a follow um matt
anything
anything you want to say to the people
before we go
uh just uh thanks for having me i hope
you were able to learn something and i'm
and
feel free to connect with me on linkedin
i don't generally reject any of the
connection requests so
there you go you heard it from the
source himself matt thank you so much
appreciate it and thank you everyone
who was watching i know we had joe mary
robert stefan and linkedin user whose
name i can't see
but thank you guys for watching um and
yeah
until next time see y'all later bye-bye
all right

Title: Building a New Product! Come Watch!

Description: Super excited about this new (FREE) product I'm making. I'm in the process of building it using Python. Today I'll be spending some time building it. Come watch and feel free to ask questions.

Video Transcript:
what's up everyone good morning
it is tuesday morning at 10 14
my time we are streaming live on
linkedin
and youtube and if you're watching
say what's up say hello in the comments
say where you're watching from
hope you guys are having a fantastic
morning
um it's 10 14. i've done some consulting
this morning and now i'm working on a
product
that i'm building for snow data science
it's going to be a free product for all
of you guys i'm really excited about it
and i was just building it and i was
like you know what
i want to live stream building it i want
to build in public i want to share with
you guys get your guys thoughts get your
guys's opinion
so i'm just going to go ahead and stream
this whole time so uh if you're if
you're watching
feel free to join feel free to add a
comment but i'm just gonna be working
working away and making a cool product
that i hope you guys are excited about
it's going to be a dash application
it's going to be a personality quiz to
figure out what
um what data science career is right for
you
um i have all these like massive uh
sweet ideas about it so
i'm pretty excited about it to get
building uh let's see we got uh
derek what's up derek how you doing down
in h-town the good old houston
we got mohamed johannes nuara what's up
how you doing
we got nishi hi how are you good morning
or
good afternoon or good evening wherever
you are um yes let's i'm just gonna go
ahead and get to work
um but feel free to feel free to add to
the comments and i'll uh
i'll throw them up i wish um stream yard
had a little bit better i
wish i could be like a little smaller
can i make myself smaller
now let's see slowly no that's fine
all right we got muhammad what's up how
you doing
we got shiva i'm excited too good shiva
you should be excited this is this is
gonna be pretty fun
we got uh prayuktha
hi how you doing sorry if i said your
name wrong hope you're having a great
day
um okay okay so let's start building
this is what i've been building right
here
it's gonna be pretty sweet it's gonna be
a personality quiz
um it's gonna help you decide what data
career is right for you so i have this
template i've been using in dash
we're gonna go ahead and change a lot
about it
um you guys may have seen me post about
this uh gif
dj al i just love it so much i have a
pdf in here it's a little small right
now we're gonna make it bigger
but don't worry about it hello m
narenda how are you um
lahari hey what's up hope you're having
a great day
so let's see i'm gonna start by changing
some very simple things that are gonna
make a big difference
okay so let's see you guys are getting
behind the scenes sneak peek because i
haven't shown a lot of people this yet
um let's see i'm gonna grab the favicon
oh my dog's mad at me how long oh
are you mad at me hold on um copy
oh wait we need to grab one of these on
okay puppy
okay my dog's mad at me i'll be i'll be
right back give me give me a little bit
i don't know what she needs
all right i'm back and better than ever
um she had to go outside she did a
bathroom
i got a i got a lar bar to eat now
okay so let's see i got this favicon i'm
gonna call it uh
what am i gonna call it i'm gonna call
it favicon.ping
um we're gonna make that let's see
um yeah favicon
dot ping we're gonna go back to vs code
we're coding in python today
we're gonna search for favicon
i can't find it anywhere
what why is it slow
i think i actually really need to i'm
gonna exit this
i'm gonna try i'm not very good at vs
code any vs code people here you guys
use vs code very often
i'm not very good at opening the right
folder
avinash what's up how are you doing good
morning
um it's not i said it's products
data career quiz let's open up that
open so this is going to be a really fun
quiz i'm really excited about it
check my phone
um let's see
doesn't seem like the latency is
streaming very good is it
[Music]
what's up
i beat pothi i'm doing very well how are
you
hope you're doing well um let's see what
am i doing all right right here
okay nice now i have everything open
that i need now i can search for
favorite com
let's see
hmm is that how that works
irvine hey every suggestion you should
try making a gif
of your dog spinning that would be
awesome i would love that
um yeah does anyone know how to make
these pixel art animations i got this
one online
does anyone know how to make these if
you know how to make these i will hire
you to make some of these
i love these so any suggestions for
pixel art animation
owner says hey avery what's up owner how
you doing hope you're having a great day
good good tuesday sataki
sat yaki says hi everybody really
excited about your new product thanks me
too it's going to be really sweet
it's going to be a quiz it's going to
tell you what data career to pursue
okay so i thought
i guess it just knows where the favicon
is i can't remember how this works
so i'm gonna delete this old one
add this new one in let's see rename
um ico
yeah that's fine i think that stands for
icon let's refresh
the page didn't load so we got to kill
it in terminal
said die
there we go died oh nice now it reset
you see this that's my new
my new logo for my new project
run it again
derek says i will learn how and get back
to avery lol
okay i don't think it's like super easy
to make these pixel art animations i
wish it was
i don't think it is though owner says
dealing with time series drives me crazy
that's super hard um that's that's
really hard
time series is tough stuff muhammad says
hey will you share the recording i need
to leave for my prayers for some time
all right muhammad um this should be on
my linkedin and my youtube
i'm not going to take it down so just
come back anytime and take a look
all right here we are
got this al going and we got our
our guy up here our favicon that's what
that's called
let's go back in
and look for dash
slides because i don't know where it is
um presentation
title looks like okay
that'll appear in the tab let's call it
um my
what data career is right
for you that might be too long but let's
let's try that
i'm going to say previous and next i
think those look fine don't
you i think those look fine not gonna
change those so i'm just gonna save
um okay i don't really
like this functionality here
i don't think and also
all right let's let's let's get to the
good part let's go to let's go to stuff
i know how to do
let's go to we're going to go to the
slides and we're going to go to the
intro slide here okay
so nothing really important here
it's going to have everything be
centered i need to decide if i really
want it like that
um do i want it like that
let's see so i'm trying to decide this
seems like a really cool quiz i'm going
to use a lot of data science
like for the quiz results actually and
um it's going to be really cool like do
some clustering
um some like i don't know what the right
word even is
some data science i'm just going to call
it that i'm trying to decide
if i should use sliders
like like this
kind of like sliders um
let's see how like this like yeah i kind
of like this slider i think
um this slider right here i guess
actually
because it's going to give me a
quantification on a scale of like 1 to
100 i guess
um i'm trying to decide if these are
going to be like annoying or not what do
you guys think taking a quiz
all right pull time everyone taking a
quiz are these going to be annoying
right here this this slider i'm going to
zoom in i don't know if you guys can see
very well
there we go so i think let's see
um boom or should i just have it like
have like specific ones
i kind of like this this is a little bit
easier huh
yeah okay let's do this or i could do
radio items but i just don't think
those look as good
i like the slider we're gonna go with
the slider all right let's decide
everyone
well i'm still interested in your pull
results so let me know what do you think
slider okay okay great
so we're going to put a question and
then a slider basically
so to do that i think the way i'm going
to do it
is i'll probably have five maybe four
yeah i love four maybe five
different answers for each question
derek says anything worth uh
doing is rarely easy true that is very
true
all right so let's see um
i should probably create a function
that is going to do this automatically
for me a little bit
because it's going to be hard to do
otherwise
i think so i think what i'm going to do
is i'm going to have like a csv so let's
open up excel
he says that could be exciting it's
going to be very exciting mohit very
exciting
uh i'm so sorry i know i'm saying your
name wrong specific sliders would be
great yeah i agree i think specific
sliders are
is the best the best option that way you
think a little bit you don't have to
think too much
kind of the options are already there
all right so this is going to be a csv
and it's gonna have question
right let's see
that's gonna be the question this is
gonna be answer one
i'll do spaces answer
two answer
three and sir that's a hard word to
spell
for all right i have four answers
let me think is that enough
yeah and it's gonna be like
it's gonna be like on a scale of one to
ten how much do you like
stuff i think so
let's like let let's take like
i don't know let's take five questions
just for a demo
okay so let's take a question
um maybe question
yeah maybe we'll add actually the index
yeah that'll be fine
okay so the question is going to be
um how much
do you like no hum yeah do you
like to code not
at all
i love it
um let's say it is all right
it's pretty good eric says
should have five answer choices i think
i think you might be right
or maybe even just three i
i think you're right i need some middle
ground all right let's add answer five
thanks derek i agree thanks for your
input um
let's see it's um
it's all right it's probably the middle
uh just a little bit
maybe have a neutral yep eric is right
everyone claps
derek derek you helped scoping this
project right here making this product
all right
how much do you like to code all right
let's do that
um
this is this is kind of interesting
would
you rather problem solve
or be creative
um let's say this is all creative
all problem solve
uh little of both
now let's just say balanced maybe in the
middle balanced
and let's say some
creative i would say
lots of creative
some problem solved that's too long let
me figure that out
um say mostly creative
mostly problem solve
um what's another good question
i filled out too many of these recently
for job applications so i just had a
recent experience with server type
questions
i know server type questions are kind of
sucky huh what do you think
derek should i have them all be like the
same answer or like like
you know what i'm saying like
like a lot kind of a lot
middle not a lot none is that easier to
follow
you guys go back and change this um
um
what's another good distinguisher you
you like
cloud computing
i'll just say nope
yes kinda i almost feel like three is
almost enough
i like but threes might be maybe not
enough
or was my camera glitching hold on my
camera might be glitching
yeah derek's right maybe better that way
if you can word all the questions to
work with it yeah
i think you're probably right okay
[Music]
gonna take me a while get the questions
let's just ignore that and yeah i'm
eating on camera i don't care
hmm
my camera's still glitching hold on
all right that's enough for right now
um
hmm let's see let's just throw it in
here for now
quiz questions we're going to make it a
csv
movie says i can't thumbs up your
comments a thumbs up
and mojit says intensity questions like
how much do you like python yep
i like that keep that one in mind
okay enough questions for now i'm gonna
have to think about those a lot more
let's get to the actual structure so
we're gonna create a function from
python
um maybe we'll put it
here some like custom utilities that
they have
so let's just add another one down here
what's called death
make quiz question
okay and that's too long so let's just
call it
make mq
um and what is that going to take in
and take in a
data frame row probably
so i'm just going to call it df row
and what is it going to return
now this is important what do we want to
return
you probably want to return
the whole thing i think um
let's see we probably want to return a
whole
slider so basically we're going to
return this
okay um
we do import
dash core components
as dcc and let's just make this
formatted a little better
um and the marks
we're gonna have it be yeah just pretty
much like this well i guess it'll be 2.5
and it'll be 7.5 and
the phrase here though is going to be
coming from
the df row so it's going to be
like df row in the
answer one
okay
and we could just make them all the same
for right now just for
being quick's sake
i'll make them different all right two
three four
and five
and is there anything else i need to do
with that
um actually we need to be returning
an html.div html.div
here where that's going to be part of it
but not all of it
that's the end of the div so let's push
that to there
right there and the div is going to have
just start that there end it
there
um derek says one of the surveys i did
recently
in three different sections one was
agree disagree neutral the next section
was two different options you need to
put the selection
as close to either to one side or not in
the middle point being
you could try to do sections within each
section wow yeah
the answer options are the same
excuse the long and late comment that's
fine i like that
um we'll just leave it for right now i
think um i do need to
import html in here which i can never
remember oh it's just like
that oh yeah that's right
i guess
oh cause it's just doing html dot yeah
that's fine okay
so um
and i need the div here to also have
like a
like just a dcc which i guess they're
calling html dot
uh h i don't know three
i'm gonna have it say uh here and i'll
just have it actually do what it's
supposed to do
which is the um question
so that's the f row
in the question section
um and add a comma here
okay so then inside of the
intro.pie we're going to have to
use pandas here
import
and as as pd
pd.read csv
what is the csv called quiz questions
quiz questions
dot csv we're gonna call this the
uh qq which is for quiz questions
okay once you've read that
then we're going to do a for loop
for i in
qq i think that'll let's just do print
i okay um
and let's save that
terminal
here refresh the page
all right i didn't see it print anything
did you guys let's try resetting the
whole thing
okay there it goes i did answer question
one cancer two okay
so that's actually not what i want to do
i wanna do it or rose i think is what it
is
i thought it is let's let's let's ask
google
all right i do this all the time we
gotta ask google all the time
uh uh panda
no no python iterates
data frame rows by row
i think it's iter but i can't remember
you can see i've already been here
oh it was iteros i was right but it
didn't have the um
let's just copy that actually right
there paste it into the code
um okay it's gonna have an index and row
so let's let's print
the row and remember it's not oh it's
just called df that's fine
okay and
start it let's see so i want to see the
row
be displayed
okay i think that's going to work
so then
instead of doing that we're going to do
we're going to repeat this so we're
going to call this function
which is going to be this
right here
and we need to be appending it so let's
just call
let's call this html dot
uh div
give it a name let's call this the
questions
and we're going to do
i need to append to that html
children i think right
let's see i don't remember how to do
that so we're going to google it
um dash append to html div
add dynamic content to a div
i think you need to use the children
section but i can't remember how to do
that
um
[Music]
so here is the div
and oh the children
i don't want to call back though
oh i think i just need to make a list so
let's just make a list
so let's just call this um
list of questions
and i think if i go back to that one
actually we're just going to do
like that and we're just going to do
list of questions
dot append
oh and it doesn't know what this is
right it doesn't know what mq is
because it needs a um
the custom utilities so we need to do
this
to here
import mq
right because that's on the custom
utilities custom functions yep okay
we're good
and it's going to be called row here
actually
and it's going to be added there okay
great then
we're basically just going to throw
html dot div
children equals list
of is it auto completing
questions all right and then like that
okay i hit save
go ahead and go to the top here
if i refresh the page is it gonna work
nope it is not why is that
i do not know i restart the whole app
see if that works oh
at least give me an error
oh nice look at that cool
so obviously
that works it looks pretty good
um
um not bad
pretty sweet guys we got some stuff
going on obviously it's too
long too wide so we're gonna put a width
on the um
right here i think and we'll just go
style
equals
i think you can just do like this with
just say 45 percent
refresh
nope that didn't work try resetting
it
i don't actually know if that's going to
work
oh it's mad at me oh because it wasn't
running
okay now it's running
okay so it did do the
what i wanted it to do so great um
question like that second always drive
me crazy because i like to creatively
solve problems
it's probably not a great question derek
you're probably right
now the question is
um
the question the question the question
is do i want these to be stacked left or
stacked in the middle
i kind of like stacked in the middle
people like justify
left though so let's just let's just um
center it real fast i think you should
just be able to do
like uh margin
uh auto maybe i'm not great at this
auto
then like justify
what's there that's uh
all right reset it
run
come on it's a little slow
nice that actually looks really sexy i'm
actually pretty stoked on that
okay um so you have to
come up with the questions now the
also the other question is how many
questions per page do i want to do
and then
the other thing is we need to
take all of their answers and add it to
a csv
somewhere so
let's make this a little bit more
simplified
um derek says center looks good i think
it'll look good on mobile too and that's
what i'm really concerned about so let's
just keep it like that
a slide for random okay a slide for a
picture
and then the end okay so i'm going to do
some stuff
right now so let's see i'm going to take
the
end page so that's probably called last
open that up
you see it just has content equals that
instead i'm going to go to the intro
page
and is this content everything's inside
of that content okay great
so i just need to grab the
[Music]
the sections i'm interested in which are
really just these
for the end page and let's go over to
last
um and i'm sure it has that on the front
page right
where does it say that oh yeah children
equals
so let's just say
do children
equals and then we start that do to do
so not access key i want to be
blank in there
okay so i think we can save that
i think that looks pretty good
um okay let's save that
save this
um what else so i don't really need the
other pages so i know if i go to
presentation.pi i can take out the other
um pages i only need intro and last for
right now
all right i'm going to save there
um i know another thing i want to do
is look at this oh maybe not
that looks pretty complicated i'm
looking
right here this is the logo
that we are looking at um let's go ahead
and get
let's add my new logo
in there so my new logo is pretty sweet
guys
data career jump start right there
opening a new course pretty soon data
career jumpstart if you're here
which i don't know if anyone is other
than derek i can't see if you're here
say hi
you are getting a sneak peek to my brand
new course i have not announced it to
anyone i have not really told the name
to anyone
so this is behind the scenes thanks for
watching i guess
all right let's add that into the
source it's going to be a
oh what return if x
equals logo
um i don't want any of that actually
if their logo if there's one git logo
assets split assets um
that's fine i can just do i don't need
all that thank you though person who
wrote this code
we don't need all that we just need this
i know what mine's called
let's put
oh we got dn youtube is better
than uh linkedin streaming yeah i agree
but more people watch on linkedin diane
so i don't know what to do there but yes
i agree youtube is better
than linkedin for streaming but i need
to build my youtube audience my youtube
audience isn't big enough right now
i gotta build it up going to watch it on
uh youtube live oh okay
there you go that makes sense maybe
maybe it's uh poor quality
um yeah go watch on youtube follow me on
youtube
do it i need i need some more followers
there assets all right let's see
hit save go back here
um didn't work but that's probably
because i have to restart the whole
thing boop um
boop boop
boop all right it's loading
loading loading loading
oh it's mad at me got multiple
arguments for children and that is in
uh last stop high okay i screwed that
one up
why is that you should have gotten one
list
let's see what intro pi does it does
children
oh you know what let's get rid of this
this guy right here doesn't need that
let's see
let's see if it will work let's see
let's see
all right go back here this is what day
to day
of data scientist life looks like
okay that's last nice
and let's go to intro oh nice
sweet um
so the question is guys if you're
watching i need your help
i need your input here i'm gonna have a
lot of questions
should i have them on multiple pages
like like one per page i think that's a
lot of work actually i don't want to do
that
should i have like 10 per page maybe
i'll have like different themed pages
i think different theme pages sounds
good but what do you guys think
um
yeah i think i think that'll be the case
um and you know what this
logo right here
actually let's go back here um
that logo i wonder if i can make that
a um
a link let's see
so let's see let's see
so i think instead of doing that logo i
actually want to do a different logo
so you guys are getting an intro go with
five you think i should have five pages
dn
five per page everyone says five i like
it
five per page all right five per page
how many pages should we have five pages
how many how do you think we should have
um let's see
so somewhere oh here's like one
that might look good up there
i also have like another one
let's see
um
you can see i haven't been doing a great
job of keeping my
information
uh very clear let's see
that one's kind of cool that's my new
linkedin banner right now
let's see working on a website can't
show you guys too many details yet
can't show you too many details yet
uh there's a good logo all right we
don't have a good logo
we're gonna just use this one for now um
i'm gonna call it
call logo two i think
logo two change this to
logo two let's see
right there
logo two and let's see can you make
um let's see
uh html
div and no image image link
url yes i think you do that with just
like h
ref let's see what does it have
href okay um
i think image source oh or is it inside
of that let's see
i can never remember let's go to html
let's go to dash let's go to
um
[Music]
let's go to
all right let's just do dcc image
and dcc
link with image
um okay i don't want upload i want this
one
children key looking for like a link
data cross origin let's just type in
href oh link
oh all right dncc link clickable
a tag on image dash source
let's see what this says you can see i
do a lot of googling
you know even though i'm i do this a lot
i do this like every day i still need to
remember
hi within the html tag
okay so i need to be an a
okay so what we're going to do here
is have it be in html
dot a
then is it an href yep href
all right y'all here's another behind
the scenes sneak peek never seen before
i don't know if i'm ready to show you
guys
is anyone listening you're here
you're going to see my brand new website
i have it hidden right now so you can't
see it you can only sign up for
the email list to be added when the when
the course is ready
there's a whole website hidden behind
here somewhere
um if you're really tech savvy maybe you
can find it
but right now i have it hidden behind
this landing page
so sneak peek only been seen right here
on this uh
very show i'm going to add the href to
go there
and i'm going to hit save um i might
make this a little bit bigger than 40
pixels actually maybe i'll make 100
pixels
see how that looks and
kill it re-run it
here cool
i don't know who this is i'm sorry maybe
your privacy settings or something on
linkedin isn't letting me
letting me see who this is uh if you
want to say your name in the comments
tell me so i can
i can know who it is we know we got
sandeep here maybe sandeep's the one
watching
sandeep's watching hello um sweet so you
guys got a sneak peek today
all right oh man it's like
couldn't do it where why did that happen
um okay
well it was working with the image
earlier so why can't you find oh because
i did
image two and it should be logo too like
that
right uh hit refresh
not gonna work have to kill it sucky
part about dash sometimes
it needs a little kick in the butt to to
get going
well sandeep saw the sneak peek loved it
i like it
feel free to go there input your email
that'd be awesome oh i just got oh wait
no i didn't
um derek said i saw the sneak peek too
yes you guys get you guys get uh the
sneak peek for being on the broadcast
for for so long
i'm back can you guys hear me oh yeah
sorry
i refreshed the wrong page
derek said i'm just taking care of my
two-year-old so i haven't been able to
comment right away oh that's fine thanks
derek how's your two-year-old hopefully
they're doing good
um okay so that looks okay we'll leave
it for now because i like
i don't like how it takes you away from
the page though so let's see if i can
figure that out
um let's go to search the google href
open in new tab because i don't want to
take them away from the page
all right everyone's back okay sorry
guys that was my fault
how to use html to open a
let's see the anchor element
to open in a new tab just set the target
attribute to blank
she's great we are building legos that's
that's awesome that's super fun
oh that's super fun all right so let's
just try this let's see if this one
works let's throw the word target in
there
to let's see this
because that's pretty important you
don't want to go to a different page
philippe k what's up
how you doing thanks for telling me who
he was all right
target equals blank all right so let's
hit save
go back here i think i have to
kill it again run it
i'll refresh the right page this time
let's see let's see
um
[Music]
all right so now if i click it it opens
in a new tab
awesome awesome awesome awesome all
right and everyone says
that they think they should have five
questions on a page
should be 25 questions long hum i don't
know how many questions to do 25
probably seems like the limit because
you don't want to get bored
during it you know so maybe we'll have
five different sections
um to the page so
so let's think how do i wanna uh
do that um
should i have five different csvs should
i do an excel
um
i'll have five different csvs that'll
just be the simplest thing i'm going to
try to get this up as fast as i can
so okay let's go back to the i think i
think though i think we need actually
an intro page right um
i want to like like say hello
so the question is
do i oh looks like it's doing that thing
again where it's like all bugging out
hold on let me try
i got i got new computer equipment guys
oh is it still
is like my video flashing or no
um wow derek's going all out i've got my
laptop hooked up to my living room tv so
i
i can watch while we play derek's the
real mvp
god i appreciate that 25 questions
sounds like a good length yeah i think
so too
okay so now the next question is i need
some sort of a
like welcome page and i also i'm doing
this for free but i want to build my
email list
just being transparent with you guys um
so i need to also have some place to get
some emails
too so i need a landing page
um oh michael taggart says it's fixed
now
hey what's up tagger how you doing good
to see you
um okay so the question is
how am i going to do
the email
um
all right so let's let's add another
page here oh it's not fixed again
um let's add another page let's see so
we can just take one of these other ones
and delete stuff out of it
oh derek you think i should do type in
your email to get the final results
like i should make them take the quiz
first and then
and then you only get the final results
of results oh you're quoting it so
that's just what people always do
yeah um michael's uh or tagger's asking
a good question sorry i'm just used to
calling you tagger
do you want to save info in a database i
do want to save the info in a database
um and i also need this to be deployed i
need to put it in the cloud
gosh what is doing that i don't know why
my video is so glitchy
but i got a new camera you guys want to
see it look at this ready
um there's my new camera it's a dslr
so instead of streaming on this crappy
webcam
i can stream on that but i'm waiting for
one more part to come in
so i can't do it today but soon
yeah it does seem like the industry
standard method i agree
i'm just i might do it up front just so
people don't i hate when i do the quiz i
just want to be upfront i'm getting
emails
like put your email in here so let's go
ahead and do that so i think
we'll take the actual contents of intro
and we're just going to actually drop
that into maybe
um oh but they have this callback here
do i need this callback
no that callback is pretty simple i'm
gonna be fine without it
i'm gonna drag all of this
actually i'm just gonna rename this
whole thing so i'm gonna hit um
no let me think what i wanna do yes
let's call this let's call this page one
okay
page one
okay so that's page one now so i need to
go to presentation
and put in page one page one
i know bug on the video that's right
it's very true it'll get better though
don't worry stay patient
also i'm in i'm living with my in-laws
right now um because
the house that we bought is being rented
out but i'll have it
i'll be in there in a month and we're
gonna have so much faster internet i'm
gonna have gig speed internet
derek i know i know we talked about
internet a while ago i'm doing an update
on my internet
this time so i'm gonna have gig speed so
it'll be a lot better
um all right we're going back to michael
taggart's question you want to save the
info on a database i do
the question is what type of database do
i make am i gonna make it like a
sql database where am i going to deploy
this because that's been the cloud
should i just be really like ghetto and
just make a csv
my database um
to be honest i've never actually
made a database from scratch for a dash
project so that's going to take me some
thoughts to know how to do
um so i got to think about that all
right let's go back to intro because
intro page is going to change now
we no longer need like any of this crap
let's delete all that
all right we do need to end the children
and the div
now the question is here we can we can
delete
all of that too the question is here
um
um the question is here how does data
transfer from page to page
i do not know the answer to that um
very good question i do not know the
answer to that so we have to figure that
out
the question is on the front page do i
just make it
in dash the welcome
stuff or yeah i think i do
so let's add let's add a div
let's make it have a background
of sorts and on that div
we're going to have inputs for
name
email
yeah that's it okay so that's what we're
gonna do
the spirit of being transparent you
could have a button that says at the end
join the email list for the more great
content and continue results
and then a smaller button for say skip
and sign up and continue results
i could derek but i'm evil and i want
their emails if they're gonna use it for
free
because as you can see i've been on here
you know for an
hour and that's an hour that i'm not
spending doing something else
so i'm nice but i also want something in
return i'm just
being honest um and i put out really
good content in my email so
hopefully people don't care as much i
don't know why my thing is bugging so
bad oh well i'm just gonna leave it
but it's a good point all right so let's
see i'm
to make a div and that div needs to have
an image
so let's see um
[Music]
let's see div
um let's go
um div with
background image
um let's throw the word dash in there
just so i don't have to be as lazy
well hey my first suggestion was to
require the email to get the results
yeah that's true
i kind of poo-pooed both of them didn't
die derek i'm sorry
oh i like it i like it um all right
background image let's see
um
okay that's just saying embedded images
i don't need that
um
let's see yes you just need to set
okay background image style and html div
okay so let's create a div
uh i don't know how many pixels to make
the div that's that's kind of the hard
thing about this so i guess we'll just
guess at first we'll say
html dot div
and we'll make the s
well no we'll just do yeah let's just do
um style equals and let's just
um back around image
and then you just need to put does it
say source oh it just says
you link to the url so let's just try
um assets
which logo a logo two okay
assets i think and then
logo2.png
i don't think you need anything there um
i end the div okay what's wrong with
that
that seems like it should be right where
that guy's ending
there oh it's mad at this
oh yeah because this is not a dictionary
oh
and now it's a dictionary all right
sweet
uh end it
um restart it so now we should have this
landing page
oh it's mad why is it mad
uh let's just go
oh it's mad and why does it have oh
because i didn't add it
or did i not save oh i didn't save all
right hold on
saved everything else though right
um let's see let's see
loading loading loading loading loading
all right derek what are you what legos
are you building you got anything fun
got any fun legos all right
page one okay page one works
the last page works the intro page works
no it doesn't because it doesn't have a
div um why doesn't i have a div
so let's take a look intro um
i thought that would work
like what do i need to say in here like
do i need to say
um
gel drain equals boop
and do like
at and let's put this
style in front
and then children and there's the
children
michael tiger says what was the outpage
that just made my day i know isn't that
fun
so if you're just joining in um i'm
working on a new product
that's going to be advertising my new
course
which is called data career jump start
it's going to be
pretty intense of course teaching like
anyone
to change from their job now to become a
data scientist or data analyst
and um i'm making this quiz as kind of a
lead magnet to get people excited about
it and to help people decide
if a data career is right for them and
if so what what might be
the right option and uh so it's like a
personality quiz right
and michael said uh where are you
streaming youtube and linkedin right now
yep that's it
um okay i'll get to that in a second
derek
so it's a personality quiz and at the
end of the
the personality quiz you're going to get
a personality and i want to make it
one of these like pixel art animations
um so this is a demo i have of what it
what it would look like isn't it fun
though i think it's super fun
so i'm going to make some of these so if
you know how to make them let me know
derek says they are big non-choking
hazard legos oh nice you got
the chunky ones we're waiting on the new
animal lego set we just ordered for her
fun that's awesome what a good dad way
to go derek
um okay so we're going back
to the code here we're mostly focused on
the intro page because it's so
weird um and when you put a style here
and then
i need to drag that here i think
um let's see now the children ends and
now the dividends okay
let's just add like an html.h1 and say
welcome what
data career is right
for you question mark
all right save we start
super sucky after restart every time i
don't really know why it's happening
road mode code
so that background image is definitely
not popping up
um
um let's see let's see how do i
make that pop up so this background
image thing is not working
did i spell it right style like a
background image maybe it's a url link
for example css let's see
this example
um let's go and um
what am i what am i doing again
a background image background image
what that seems like i'm doing it right
because the style maybe i spell let's
try their
exact one this is gonna be like
some maybe the assets is wrong did i
do that wrong
derek says hoping her brain will soak up
some of some little data science
knowledge from hearing you stream in the
background
derek's daughter is about to be the best
uh uh
data scientist of all time dal is super
fun
uh yeah the linkedin beta streaming
program yeah i've
been in it for i don't know eight months
or something now
um i got i got denied the first time so
if you've tried
just keep going um all right i think
maybe the assets is wrong
did i oh yeah see stupid avery this dumb
dumb dumb sorry i didn't mean to say
stupid in front of your daughter derek
i'm really sorry
um that backslash should have been not
there
shouldn't have been there so now restart
it and now let's see if it works
oh what the heck
uh
oh i love it culture coulter says
watching you struggle through this gives
me some hope as an aspiring data
scientist
glad to see what it's really like yeah
you can see i'm an hour in and i haven't
really gotten that far have i
ah why is that happening so we have a
background image we have assets logo two
um they're just like any chance that
it's just like
something else really stupid let's try
refreshing again
[Music]
nope so let's go back to the google
search and see if we can find something
out so
plotly dash um
plotly dash uh
div background image
well here's an unable derek says
i'm certain she hears way worse from
from her mom and i
well i i'm sorry anyways
also yes it's been nice to watch you
google the function to iterate through
rows yep i am not good
at programming i always forget so don't
worry about it
uh michael taggart says where is your
assets folder
it should be it's working for the other
one so it should be in the right place
it is here's my
let's see my index and it's going into
assets and it should be finding
logo2.ping
you're right maybe maybe i should try
one more time let's try assets that's
how you spell it logo2.ping yeah that
should be right
let's just try logo.ping and see if that
works i don't know you never know
i don't think that's gonna work we'll
just um we'll keep looking
um the only solution
looks like it's there but you have it
off screen oh
for example update the image dictionary
to
oh is that what's happening
guys is that what's happening is it off
screen
that would be crazy background
let's see oh he doesn't even have it
in his code um
did you make your linux server or are
using a cloud service so
okay so i'm on a mac so i'm out i'm
automatically have
this local host thing that's just
running local
i'm going to need to use a cloud service
um
unless you want to teach me culture how
to do a linux service server because i
don't know how to do that
but i'll probably end up using heroku or
google cloud platform to deploy this
it is not deployed right now but it
would be fun to deploy
by the end of this which i'm hoping will
be in an hour
um but why is this not working
this guy didn't have like the word
background in here
so i don't really trust him
going out
oh crap did i click on the wrong thing
yeah i did
add background image
gosh lots of people struggling with this
here's a working demonstration
is it because i need to use a url is
that what's going on
for the heck of it let's just try this
url
you could test oh that's a good point
tagger i could test by making it a
ridiculous size
[Music]
um
instead let's just try this
see if that works oops
need the
innards here all right oh i got two of
those somehow
um all right let's see if that works
save
uh exits restart it
okay okay
so it does have that image there so
maybe you do need it to be a url that
seems stupid
um
also kind of a weird image i don't know
what it is i guess we could probably
find out
um oh it's a north star
okay yeah that's what the image looks
like okay
so we have an image so let's see um
let's maybe try one more thing let's try
background
image from local css
i don't really want how to give the
background image path in css
let's see what that says oh is it do i
need to use the url
oh look at that you need to use url
who knew who freaking knew i did not
know that okay so let's hit ctrl z ctrl
z ctrl z
ctrl z and then just type in url
and that's gonna work are you freaking
kidding me this is
this is the life of a programmer am i
right like the stupidest things make
such a big difference and you're like
why doesn't like that's not even a url
in my opinion but
okay sweet so that you see that's gonna
work um
because you can see kind of oh it looks
like it's like repeating itself
too which is kind of interesting all
right
um
derek says i definitely need to learn
some more html stuff html stuff's really
hard
know what's happening is you have the
background image of the div being the
image
now it's happening you do not need a url
oh
what you want is the background of the
entire page
what's happening is that you have the
background of the div
being the image
that's what i wanted i just i just
wanted to look like this even though it
looks dumb right now
um i think that's gonna look fine in a
little bit but maybe you're right i
don't know
coulter says i'm still learning i have a
linux headless server trying to
force myself to learn it the networking
stuff is where i'm stuck it's a bit
confusing
but happy to share uh what i've done
with you want so far
have the hardware for or you could run
through a vm from your mac wow culture
you're ahead of me i don't know how to
do any of that
um yeah maybe we'll see because it is
kind of pricey
doing a cloud platform so
we'll see if i get there all right let's
just add some extra
stuff let's just say like i don't know
html h6
take the quiz everyone is talking about
hopefully and then we're going to need
like um
i'm
going to need to make a like
input section um
let's see i want to i want to have
an input section i'm just trying in my
head thinking how i want that to look
if you want to have
like an input an input
and then like a go button i think that
sounds fine i mean it's not like
ideal but like let's just do it trying
to get it done fast
i'm doing this from scratch like this is
pretty crazy like i have
looked at a service that was like 20 a
month to make these types of things but
it wasn't going to be
exactly what i wanted it to be so i'm
like i'm just going to do it all right
so let's see html
dot input and say um
i need to look this one up too h uh
dcc input because i can't remember
like how you say what is the value
is that what it is see
um yes let's see
input value oh yeah look it we can we
can even like
specify it as an email i think
right let's see um
allowed types let's see text allowed
types email yeah see
so here it is it's an id
the type and the placeholder okay so
this is going to be a type which is
going to be text
type equals text
um derek says coulter networking is so
weird the knowledge difficulty seems to
go from zero to 100 immediately
yeah i don't think that's my uh
expertise and michael says yup
uh that's awesome i don't know anything
about that not my expertise i'll let
someone else figure it out all right
type
let's do a placeholder and let's have it
say
name obviously full name just for fun
um okay and
uh we're eventually gonna need an id so
i'm just gonna say
id equals name
and eventually we're going to need an
email so let's just say
type equals i think it's email is that
what it is
that's sweet i didn't even know that
they could do that what happens if i
like try to put like a non-email
here like all right oh it's red oh
that's cool
avery at snow.com
okay now let's that through that's not
my email but there's no way i can get
around that
let's see tagger says i do something
like this input email type text value
email
on change set email e target value input
yeah i think we're gonna do something
similar to that obviously a little less
javascripty
um on the set email
i do need to figure out how i'm going to
use a database i don't know what i'm
doing
there to be honest i'll figure that out
but i'm not worried about it right now
okay um email placeholder
equals uh email
id guess what equals email
and the value gets sent to the database
what's once the button is clicked yeah
that's true i'm trying to decide
you're probably right that's probably
the best thing to do
um we're gonna have this uh
um
i have this shoot it's gonna be
well let's just put a button in for now
um
html dot button i think is what i want
to do
let's go find it
on this button
oh but then
ah log out button just a regular button
is there not a regular button
there has to be right tcc button i can't
remember any of this in dash
html that button why aren't you popping
up earlier
yes lots of decisions i need to figure
out i think you're right though i think
it's probably the best thing to do
all right it's a button the word is
submit
and n clicks okay um
i'll say take me to
the quiz and we'll say
id equals start
button
and then we'll just say nclix
equals zero
okay so then let's see what that looks
like just for fun
um stop restart
there is a lot of decisions there are
millions of decisions oh no
has no attribute input i'd come on you
have an attribute input
did i spell it wrong
what hold on
lowercase i that's that could be the
case like no
gcc all right let's just call it dcc
i don't know why i'm calling it html it
should be called dcc
oh because this is the html components
okay that actually makes sense
html components core components html
components
core components all right
rerun oh my gosh where did my
chrome go oh there it is
all right refresh
oh okay interesting interesting
interesting interesting
um
so
that's a little hokey i think i think
you want a one for each line
it's also using a css i don't really
like
oh i probably have to change that
dude this is awesome i gotta get to work
i love your stream do you have a stream
schedule
thanks michael i don't have a stream
schedule
um i don't usually i don't usually work
while i'm streaming
or stream while i'm working but i've
tried to build more
in public so um i thought i'd do it
today
but thanks for joining in appreciate you
um
i guess so in order to combat
those all being on the same line i'm
just gonna be lazy and put breaks in
between them
i think that'll solve the problem i hate
the way that button looks
so we're gonna have to go try to solve
that in css
all right let's just get the full thing
you know out first
i'm saying just like functioning let's
see if i can refresh it
i don't know why it's making me exit it
every single time too
okay there we go
[Music]
all right that's pretty sexy not bad
derek says honestly avery this is
probably the best type of stream you
have done yet
well thanks you're the only one who's
really watched probably the whole thing
derek so i appreciate you um it is
pretty fun
yeah exactly what you just said it's it
is fun to see the process you know
everyone it's like instagram versus
reality everyone just shows the results
i'm trying to show
you know what it takes to to get there
um
okay so that i mean doesn't look
fantastico
but it looks okay
so so it's gonna
look like that i don't know
kind of weird and then it's going to be
take me to the quiz
the question is do i make it
take me to the quiz i mean this should
be disabled
until until
you you press this button
so
got to think about how to do that then
you're going to have
these um sections here i'm just going to
delete
the page one crap at the bottom i don't
need that stuff
yeah so this stuff i do not need just
need that
save and then this next let's work on
the last page
it's going to say something like
um
html
if i don't know let's just do
html h1 have it say
congrats
you
matched with dot dot dot maybe we'll
actually be like h
three or something like that then we're
gonna have html one
h1 will say like data scientist
and then this will be um the image which
is a little big right now i would say
probably need that to be about 600 if i
had to take a guess
um then you're going to scroll down here
and it's probably going to say something
like
um h5
data scientists
are dot dot dot and it's gonna have like
html dot p
really cool really fun
and get paid a lot all right
and then we're gonna have uh
let's see an html
h3 that's gonna say download
the full pdf summary
and then it's going to have this pdf
which you've already seen
um the
width of which i think you just do with
i think and
say it is 600 px
let's try that
a couple things here
oh it's mad line 15 i missed a
all right there comment
missed another comment right there
and i think i'm good
almost lunch time for me lunch time for
anyone else everyone else already in
what'd you guys eat for lunch
oh fetch can't do the width
html iframe width we need to google that
html iframe width
oh we're going to need a download button
there too which is going to download the
pdf
let's see
i guess you just do 200 all right six oh
i missed a period that's the problem
or a comma so actually we need a
oh that's not going to be that's going
to be button not an html3 i think
let's make it a button
button
derek said we had a late breakfast
because we got shipley's yum
for those who haven't been shipless's
donut place pretty good
i go for a donut right now
is my video even working i feel like my
video is not working yeah
i feel like the whole stream's frozen
was the whole stream frozen is it pretty
spotty
that's fine i guess
pretty sure it's just my homie derek in
the audience anyways
all right let's refresh this page
oh yeah that looks super good that's
kind of what i wanted to look like
right there yeah that looks good
download the full pdf summary and then
uh we need to put a height on this too i
think
at a height all right derek says he sees
the stream fine
sweet um height
equals um
all right guys since it's a pdf i want
to kind of look like a pdf dimensions
so if i have the width set to 600 which
is what it's set to right now
just to kind of match the rest of the
page right then um
then what is the height so i guess we
know
right a piece of paper is about a pdf
size that's eight
eight and a half by eleven so
um if we said if we said that that is
600 is the eight and a half
so let's just do eight point five
times eleven ninety-three wait no no
i'm supposed to do eleven divided by
eight point
five is 1.2
times by 600 that means the height
should be
776 all right let's do that
let's try that see how that looks um i'm
also noticing i
hate these buttons we're gonna have to
deal with these buttons but that's fine
they don't do anything right now um but
that also needs a break in between
it looks like maybe we could throw
margins on i guess
just a break for now
um i also saw some other places yeah
after the data scientists
are so let's add a whole html dot
br there
um that looks pretty good otherwise
though and i think at the top i'm going
to delete the break it doesn't need one
all right save that let's check the
other pages just to see how they're
looking
page one that's gonna look really good i
think we're gonna make it a little bit
bigger
um and let's see the intro page
doesn't look good right now but we're
gonna fix that
um okay um all right who's still here
just derek derek got 776
nice um all right derek slash anyone
else who's watching
comment now so i know you're watching um
i need to make a decision here
about if i want the whole page to be
white what do you think the white looks
pretty good don't you think
like this looks really good i feel like
in white so i think i should leave it as
white
i should just probably change the logo
and i'm gonna i'm gonna change this
image too
to be something a little bit better i
think
um but it'll probably be still white
text i'll probably just take a stock
image if i had to guess
um
okay let's think let's think let's think
what else what else what else
um
derek likes the white i like the white
too derrick
um so what's what's an easy step for me
right now
this page i'm really stoked on this page
let's let's just look at that page again
i hated it
yeah that looks awesome
yep that pdf looks great
seriously gonna look super good oh wait
there's a download button right there
oh my gosh i don't even need this button
because the download button's right
there right that works
oh yeah that is fine that is fine with
me
yep we're getting rid of that someone's
already coded something
that i don't have to do we're going to
take that and run with that
connor what's up how you doing
hope you're having a great tuesday
connor dixon
um i'm just here with derek trying to
make a new product we're making a
questionnaire to figure out what data
science career path someone should take
this is the final page
um okay
so i really like this final page
honestly i think that's good enough for
right now
i think that's gonna look pretty sweet
we're gonna obviously change some stuff
um right here though
um i guess we could add some questions
let's make it like more realistic a
little bit let's just add some more
questions
and i guess we're going to have derek
and i decided on five
i need to come up with the questions
probably on my own but let's just add
some more here
um
uh are you introverted
or extroverted
uh let's just do extreme introvert
let's see so connor any i'm open to any
suggestions you have on any of this by
the way
let me know extrovert
uh in between
a little shy pretty
outgoing a little more question
some of these too um
i like would you rathers i think those
are working pretty good
um which
you were
um or like choices kind of like machine
learning or
data vis but that's like kind of too
obvious
um how much time can you spend the loan
that's kind of another one
[Music]
any questions you guys got
um coding
[Music]
uh how important
is finding insights
to you um this
is not important
this is a
point and between
meh
pretty important all right so that's uh
one set of questions there one thing i
feel like it let's left out a lot
is salesmanship versus persuasion skills
got to be able to sell
people on your results oh that's a good
point that's a very good point
i think i'm going to crowdsource some of
these questions um
all right so what do we think i think
that if we're gonna have five questions
per page these can be a little bit
bigger
so let's go ahead and go back to the
code
go to our custom section right which is
the custom functions
instead of an h1 let's make them h sorry
instead of h3 doesn't make it h1
let's also check the slider values
yeah i'm not sure either derek how to
put that into question but like
how salesy are you that's that's kind of
i get your point you know
um okay so let's go back into
dcc slider font size i think
some of these things we can customize
um
let's just read that one
i'm sure it's probably a style right so
it's probably going to look something
like this
style equals and have a dictionary
oh and now it looks like
um
it's like a okay right here here's the
oh the marks
have a color i just want the text
let's see um let's go back
oh i remembered i remember do seeing one
that had a
different color right here right okay so
style color
equals how comfortable are you in a
situation where you have to persuade
someone to see
your point of view oh i like that that's
really interesting
um okay so you'll notice that these have
styles and they have
a color associated with it um we can use
i kind of like the color actually the
font size is what's doing it for me
so let's just let's just guess ready
font size
probably and let's set it to
20. i don't know if that's going to work
let's see if it works
nope type error slider
it needs oh do i suppose style wrong
what is there no style on the slider
there has to be a style i'm a style on
the marks
update mode drag step
div margins
drag value properties
marks i guess it's probably marks
huh all right everyone it's marx don't
worry
all right so we need to do
um mark
marks equals i think
marks equals and then the question is do
i need to say
um
looks like style the dictionaries passed
in
so how does that work
okay marks equals and it looks like
that or
no hold on it just says
style so let's just put style in
and then it's a i like that
and then it's that okay
leave it a little bit more broad than
asking about sales yeah i think i think
you're right i'm actually going to copy
that hold on how do i
i don't know how to copy that out of the
comment
uh i'll add that comment later i'll keep
it i'll keep it'll be in the comments
don't worry you'll see it you'll see it
derek
um okay um i'll add it right now what
the heck why not
all right let's just type it out how
comfortable
are you persuading someone to
see your point of view
bear no not at all
in between
pretty comfortable
i am king at this
save okay
what was i doing hey i was making the
font size bigger then i stopped it i
already stopped it
okay running
save this too i don't know it's
different but let's save it
are you running re-running
oh it doesn't look like it worked
keyword
argument repeated
oh good no good what's happening um
where are we on the
oh yeah custom functions oh marks are
right here i'm a dummy
um
that was so stupid of me okay oh i said
it again i'm sorry
wolf of wall street leave comfort yeah i
like that
um okay so yeah this is a mistake um
so let's look at the help one more time
so it should have a label and a value
and then it should have
so that is the okay
the label okay so i need to put in the
word label here
all right i think if i use command f
command r hold on how to okay replace i
can replace df row
i'm going to be replacing it with
label
ef bro let's add a little space
ink and how do i
boom oh wait nope
what is that what does this do
replace enter okay nice nice
nice nice nice okay
and now these need a style
oh that'd be kind of cool to do nope
avery keep simple style
um and the style is in a dictionary
which is the font size
let's try that
and those are actually all going to be
the same and then we're going to close
that so i can actually just go
and delete this i think
and it's mad at me because why
ma marks is ending
oh but the label oh wait should have two
wait it does so those all end
label
that ends the slider that ends
the div i don't think that's mad
how am i distributing this survey is it
for your students
no it's gonna be for everyone um i'm
gonna distribute it
via the web um so it's actually gonna
have like a url
um so you're gonna just type in the url
and be able to take the quiz
and then um you're gonna get all the
results you need
and i'm doing it one to help people
because i think the quizzes out there
aren't that great
and i'm gonna do some pretty interesting
things with it that are very unique
which is why i'm not using a software to
build it
i'm building it from scratch and two
i'm advertising my new course which i'm
really excited about
which is called um oh well you can't see
it right now but it's called
data career jump start
so it'll be free for everyone and then
it'll just be advertising for my course
basically
that's oh anyways um all right let's try
running it again
did he get mad at me invalid
oh wait no
that's how it should be zero
26 all that stuff's good
oh commas commas will do it gotta have
commas
that pesky comm am i right is always in
the way
all right python indexed up high
all right looks like it's running let's
see
oh
okay
we are hitting a limit here
um so this is
six questions i think um
it definitely needs a
break on those so the slider's over
then let's add html.br to try to
separate the pages a little bit
that's for one thing those different
questions also
yeah i think
also i can make it a little bit longer
so it has more space
right which is in the page 1 section
which is 45
we can probably make it like 65
that would look good i think um
i will say we need like i think the
pages are going to have like themes
so i'm going to add like an html h1
here and say like soft skills
or something like that um and we'll
probably need an html.br there too
okay save
all right i think that's actually pretty
cool we'll make that
soft skills look a little bit cooler and
i think we'll just keep one
two three four
five and you know what i'm noticing that
all of these at the end
are having trouble because they're at
the end
i don't know if i'm gonna do five or
maybe three
left to decide
um
which is the point about be introvert or
extrovert these are just kind of
practice questions i don't know if i'm
sold on any of them now
but one thing i will say is there's
definitely roles in data that involve
more
introvertedness versus extrovertedness
sometimes you have to be able to like
speak to a lot of people sometimes
you're just a programmer
you're coding all day you know like
right now i'm just coding all day
um and then derek's right yeah i
probably want to figure out all your
questions before you decide on themes
yeah probably okay so
um i'm pretty i mean obviously this is
not done yet and it doesn't actually do
anything it just
matches everyone to a data scientist
right now and gives everyone the same
pdf
that's not what we want but we're okay
with it right now
um so i think we're going to go ahead
and
this looks awful we got to deal with
this huh
[Music]
yeah we want this to look good at least
for right now
um
all right so here's what we're gonna do
we're gonna make this look good
well no should i all right pull all
right audience pull all right
uh claudia connor derek i know you guys
are watching anyone else who's watching
um i got a question for you yeah
we're 13 minutes shy of two hours i'll
probably quit at two hours for the day
um at least streaming i'm kind of losing
my voice
so would you guys rather
see me deploy this on a cloud
application
or would you rather see me come up with
the database
solution or would you rather see me
clean up the
the front page of this like make it look
nicer and
formatted so once again three choices
make it look nice
database solution cloud solution ready
go
vote connor claudia derrick vote please
if you guys wouldn't mind i'll do it
i'll do whatever you guys want
whatever we gotta do it all eventually
right
all right while you guys are thinking
i'm gonna try to find that other um
other logo i feel like that logo here's
one
oh wait no that's not a logo
i'm not making a mind one barrack says
front page
anyone else disagree with derrick you
guys are seeing all these pictures of me
that i've been trying to use
whoa uh
i also got another front page sweet
again all this uh all right martha says
front page
everyone says front page the front page
it is something fun for the short time
left all right yeah that's good that's a
good point derek because i don't know if
i was even going to be able to deploy it
on the cloud in
15 minutes okay so the first things
first we need to have
a better looking picture i think
um and we need to change the text so
let's start with let's start with the
picture
um all right so let's start the picture
we're gonna start the picture
we're doing we're doing the front page
appreciate all you guys votes all right
i'm gonna go to canva.com
um this is where i make all of my like
images and stuff like that
um once again you guys are getting a
sneak peek into
um all the stuff i'm doing i'm building
an awesome course
um that is going to be really
comprehensive it's going to be really
cool
i have not told anyone about it yet so
if you guys see anything on this page ah
this is what i was looking for
wide logo is that on my machine wide
logo
doesn't look like it all right this uh
new course i'm building is going to be
huge it's like a giant course um that's
really
a boot camp it's supposed to replace a
boot camp um it can be a lot cheaper
than a bootcamp
um and it's called data career jump
start and this is where i made my logos
so there's my logo and this is like kind
of a more
uh wide logo so i'm gonna download it as
a png with a transparent background
i might double the size because why the
heck not
download okay then
oh but no that's just for that's just
for the logo so let's just do
uh where's my finder here
go to the top of downloads the wide logo
oh it already was on my computer
somewhere
all right but now it's in my assets
folder rename
wide logo.png
let's go to the um
oh man where is that being served i
actually don't even know where that's at
anymore
not on slides i don't think right is it
on the index
let's see logo
get logo oh yeah
it's its own function get logo
which is right there
right and it's set to 100 pixels but
let's
make it wide logo and the height is
going to be 100 pixels let's see
how that looks i won't refresh the page
because i'll do it all at once
um martha says i like canva.com just
found out the other day but not sure how
to uh
utilize it yet but on it that's sweet i
really like canva
it keeps all my stuff really easy to use
it's like photoshop but simpler
it's not as good as photoshop but at
least something
um let's see so
that's how i want it to look it's going
to be up there okay
now we need a logo for the background
okay and um
so let's see what we have we need to be
kind of wide
um we could just take
i have this one of me which is kind of
cool i kind of like that one
ah this one's kind of cool and we can
take out the image
you gotta think it's gonna be on this
front page
what do we want it to look like um
we might just want to be like more like
this
right yeah i think we're just going to
take this
um and we're just gonna delete some
stuff and resize it
i think so this is an ad that i'm
selling my course on or like part of the
website i've built basically
and delete all this delete all that
delete all that delete all that okay now
we're left with that image i'm going to
hit resize
oh wait shoot i need to hold on i need
to undo all that
um i'm um ctrl z control g ctrl z
control z control z
okay we're good i should have done this
first resize
um custom size the width is good
let's make the height double which would
be what
680
copy and resize that's what i needed to
press
weird that on my computer i can thumbs
up people's comments but on my mobile i
can only reply
get together linkedin i know linkedin's
not a great streaming platform
okay so now that i resized it i'm gonna
just make this stock image i got from
like pexels.com or something
somewhere i can use it for free right um
then i have this just black box that has
an opacity over it
so i can just like kind of turn down the
brightness basically
and make it look a little bit nicer i'm
still not convinced on that sizing
let's just see what it does so i'm just
going to call this like
dark computer page
download ping
all right and i don't know the hard
thing is i'm not very good
at html so i don't know
i don't know what all the consequences
might be
from doing what i'm about to do
but let's let's let's look up let's
close this close this
let's look up html
div size okay
that's going to have a height and width
dimensions to it
and you just set height is that what you
do
the browser calculates the height and
width all right
so i think i'm going to pass in a height
and width on
this i'm going to try to make it the
size of the image that's my goal
height
and it's going to be how big is our
image
960
by 640 right or 680 680.
so 680 px
i don't know what this is going to do
the mobile version of this so we're
going to have to figure that out
with 960
px okay i'm not sure that's going to
work
and oh yeah we need to change the image
too huh so instead of logo
two it should be
[Music]
arc computer page copy that over
um rename it grab the whole name
drag back on to this
right here okay hit save
all right kill this reload this
is reloading let's think what else do we
need to do we need to make
the um these breaks a lot bigger
maybe we'll add margins or br i don't
know the difference really to be honest
i'm not good at
website coding really all right refresh
this page
oof darn it
oh who knows what i did wrong i know
what i did wrong hold on
hold on hold on no i don't know what i
did wrong never mind
i thought it was the same error i did
earlier
with the url not being there but the url
is there maybe it's the
the height and the width give me any
information
no it's not giving me any information
let's delete these just for now
okay save i also lost the other logo
which seems weird
oh you know what this was kind of dumb
of me
i forgot the way that this let's close
everything
this app has like an app inside of an
app i'm just going to delete that app
so inside of here
has this thing called example i'm going
to delete that
don't need it yeah that's better um
now we need to check uh
let's see let's see now we need to find
that get logo thing
i should have worked let's let's rename
wide logo to be something a little bit
more simpler
wide logo oh it's just wide logo.page
that's why that's not working
wide logo so that'll solve one problem
we had but the other problem we had
was in the pages
whereas pages slides i guess is what
they call it
intro and it wasn't finding this
let's make that a simpler thing as well
let's just call it the intro dot png
okay well it looks like it should work
resetting it
they mad at me i was just loading
sweet look at that guys so we have
our image here it's a little too big
so we're going to go back to the get
logo section which is
here and instead of 100 maybe we're
gonna make it
75 save that and this
is still uh
way too small so and
also notice that this needs to be a
white color now so let's do that first
so let's just add a style into this
style
equals probably font color if i had to
guess
i'm just gonna hope that i can say white
i don't know if that's the case
um html6 seems too small maybe we'll
make it html4
the input let's just type in avery smith
i mean that looks fine right avery js
gmail.com yeah that looks pretty good
the width could be a little bit bigger
on those maybe what do you guys think
should i make the width bigger
i think the bigger deal is just it's too
tight
um let's try saving that
and let's try one more thing let's try
making this div let's give it a height
again
height and i'm gonna guess
oh yeah i know the height don't i
680
um reload reload refresh
refresh refresh
oh see that looks kind of interesting
okay so let's talk about this
all right audience we like the double
image yes or no
i don't think we like the double image
it's just filling it in because it's
it's too wide i think we should probably
do
one image all right well let's first
let's just fix this stuff first
notice it didn't do the white so i must
done the white thing wrong
so let's try um
is it just color h1
color color or font color
oh i think it's let's see
style property value yep i'm trying i
know that
background color
set the background color for two
different elements i don't want the
background color the text color
the font family
did i miss the font color am i dumb
text color oh i think it's just color
okay
let's do color i think that's going to
work so let's go ahead and throw that
into here
i think the white will look really nice
how are we on sizing what do you guys
think
that definitely needs to be dropped i
think this could probably be an h2
um and then the formatting is still
weird
so let's talk about that oh sorry i was
i was looking at my other screen over
here for a second there apologies you
guys didn't see me
look stuff up derek says he kind of
likes damage
side by side huh anyone else like the
the side by side i don't know if i do
i'm i'm not convinced for or against it
right now
um i'm gonna look up what does html
dot br even do i know it's break but
like can i pass something into it
i'm thinking it's a website what is html
dot br
there's a line break okay
so can i add like adds a single
break of line
i'm trying to think what's probably is
it the right way to do
like um
like a big break size what do you think
html br size anyone know html know if
i'm doing this wrong
all right let's see change the height
uh br display margin okay 10 pixels
at least setting line height consider
content
um
sorry i like the single image i think i
do too not
like the way lower but just so just not
so close to the top yeah that's what i'm
trying to figure out
i'm trying to figure out oh actually
you're so right hold on hold on hold on
i'm a dummy hold on you're right
um so we have this html i like it going
across the whole page i think i like a
single image i think martha i think
you're right
i'll edit that in a second um we're
actually going to go back into canva and
do it i think
um but i need to test it on mobile too
that's another thing
because i think a lot of people take
this on mobile
which is sucky actually
let's figure that out um
okay so you are right
derek that what i should do is do html
dot div
and maybe do div ends here
this is all wrapped in a div now
and i think all i need to do oh i need
to say children equals
and put that down at the bottom
i think i can add a style down here
like um margin auto
uh just defy
center let's try that i think that
should make it
why are you mad at center am i blind
oh i am blind it needs to be like that
nice
okay now save that
eric says i do have to admit the single
image makes it look more intentional
yeah it does
it just will look better like that
um okay
i wonder oh let's just try this all
right
um so i'm hoping that these will turn
white
and it'll move down
okay they turned white but they did not
move down okay so let's think what am i
doing wrong there
the white looks great though huh
but yeah this needs to be um
way more better position so let's type
in html
vertically center text in div that's
what i was trying to do
i thought margin auto
padding text align
center right no center line
this div is centered
yes white looks good i agree derek um
center align elements
all right let's see
center and image auto margin left margin
right
um float
i am vertically centered how did it do
that
is using a top and bottom padding
uh um
um
i don't really want to do it like that i
don't think
padding and text align center all right
so i guess i don't have
well text lines already there so i guess
i need to use padding
i don't really know how padding works
let's just try it
um so my guess is you just go like that
and the question is what is this
uh let's just do dash vertically
center text and div let's see if it gets
any better
hmm
hmm
after two hours so it's a good thing i
didn't do anything more complicated
i don't know if a padding is does it go
like this
doesn't seem good
we'll try this i'm not too confident
with that though should probably change
the css
if i had to guess
well i didn't give an error
it didn't do anything though
okay let's think let's go back into
let's look at our
assets folder okay there's no css let's
see if there's any css
here um let's go
find css nope there's no css
oh okay so i'm going to do
really fast
is there another vs code open
um okay i'm gonna open
what am i gonna open
open some code over here
hold on
um there it is
and look at the main dot pi
open with i'm just gonna open with text
edit over here
and
oh i thought i grabbed that css
did i not let's see let's see um
shoot well oh yeah
this is okay never mind it was for the
dash class that's what i was doing
um let's see
derek said do those gloves help with
carpal tunnel are they purely form of
fashion they're just carpal tunnel and
it is cold down here but yeah it's just
carpal
tunnel
um let's see education
uh dedicated this is the course that we
took
that we made let's see and over here
yeah okay
so see let's open this up just in text
edit real fast
i'm just going to grab this right here
let's put that into the main dot pi
which is our app.pi right yep
external style sheets okay so it does
have an external style sheet i don't
like the external style sheet
what if i just hold on let's see then it
does
what if i just did this ready
css style does that ruin everything
all right save i think i can just
refresh this page let's see
did it already
all right i don't know let's let's
delete it
reopen it
[Laughter]
okay um derek
let me let me send you a link um
actually i'll go there right now hold on
oh wait it's not there
crap derek i will send you a link okay
i'm gonna make i'm gonna send you a link
okay so
that really kind of wrecked the page huh
and didn't really fix this
per se it made the the button look
better
um let's see the other ones oh
yeah okay so we're going to have to undo
that that was if i put both of them in
let's see
so i'm just going to type in
a z at and i'm just going to add this
guy
do that
save um
okay now let's see if it fixed itself
yeah kinda all right i don't think that
css is doing me any good so i'm going to
actually just delete that css we don't
need it
all right and this should take us back
to where we were so we got nowhere
awesome um
okay so now i need to think
i think we're just gonna add oh wow
let's think let's think let's think
i still don't get why that's not
vertically centered
i should be i feel like maybe it is now
let's see
oh okay why isn't that vertically
centered i should be doing
justify center padding i mean 700 pixels
what does that do
probably nothing i don't think that that
pixel thing is doing anything
fresh i think that's my issue
so let's look up
um dash
plotly if what am i
what am i looking at padding
i don't know how i'm saying that
martha i love it dang it derek says
hello seems like maybe the front page
option
was the complicated one yeah maybe
i guess we're 15 minutes over that's
okay i want to finish it
um so let's do it
[Music]
oh you know what might be helpful
um with the style parameter for more
details style padding equals 10. all
right let's just do this
i don't think this needs to be a list i
think all this needs to be is like this
and it needs to be
like let's just say 10. i'll say 100.
all right gotta res i hate how i'm
having to reset this
i don't know what's going on that makes
it do that
it's just not loading fast enough
okay so see how that works right there
that looks pretty good
um gosh i hate that button we're gonna
we're gonna fix that button
we're gonna make that button that just
looks like 2002 to me so okay
we got somewhere here first i think we
need a better a better image
so what i'm gonna do well actually
you know what i'm on a roll do i have
any appointments hold on
i don't have any appointments till three
so you know what i'm gonna just
i'm gonna keep going all right so if you
guys have to go no problem but
i think i'm gonna keep going because i'm
on a roll so
this is so important because i wanted to
look good on
derek's like nice uh i wanted to look
good on
what's it called on mobile
right and i don't really know what it's
going to look like on mobile right now
so i kind of want to know what's going
to look on mobile
so
or should i just make it and then make
it look good on mobile later
a small gap between email and button
will look good too yeah i agree it
i'm i'm trying yeah
you're you're right let's
give me a second here give me a second
to think i'm trying to decide if we
should deploy now
um or if we should just make it because
i'm trying to figure out
how it might look on mobile
um
you know what we're just gonna keep
we're gonna keep going for right now
let's just keep going we won't deploy
right now
um okay so we'll just leave it like it
is
and see how it looks on mobile so let's
grab
um these inputs are ugly
um they're okay i guess right um
i think we need some padding some more
padding all over the place
i'm gonna try you know what can you do
this hold on i saw someone do this once
i think
can you do this
hold on i think you could can you add
this in in
uh vs code like
add a window tile window left of screen
all right that's not exactly what i
wanted but see
this is what i'm afraid of it's gonna
like look like that on mobile
all right all right that's fine because
mobile is gonna be like this
that actually looks okay
we'll have to figure out how to do the
some of the other stuff but okay
um let's add a
css file that's going to make that
button look
a little bit better so
um so i guess i'm going to go to assets
and we're going to create a new file
um how do i do that new file like that
okay nice we're going to call this
avery.css i think
and let's just go to the pen code
um this one
um oh where am i how do i get back to
the
vs okay there we go um let's go
i don't think we're gonna need canva
again so let's just go post that
in there nice here's the dash style
guide
um we're going to look for the word
button button button
button
search button how do i search all the
buttons
um there's the buttons how do i
see these look a lot better with the
button class
button class is somewhere on here button
elements buttons
oh wait no i want
oh yeah wait that's what i want css
oh wow
button
[Music]
okay so i think i just click and drag
this
all of this
all of this yep
i think right there i'm gonna drag that
into assets
i'm gonna hit press save
um i don't know like which one will
overwrite which one
i think water
oh see the button updated look that
looks so good
um we just need to add some some padding
on that i think
padding 0 and 30 pixels what if i made
it
also i don't want it to be see-through
right why is that the case is that
see-through
uh let's add all right so there's the
color
oh background color transparent yeah we
don't want that
what do you guys think what do we want
the best part about vs code is this
right here
so what color what color should we do
this um
maybe like that color i don't know
maybe like that color
and um what happens if i add like
a 50 there
and let's just make the font size like
19
maybe um
all right save let's see if i refresh
this page
i was about to ask about the see-through
yeah i don't it's pretty cool actually i
didn't know you could do that
okay i don't know what the padding's
doing let's make this like
300 pixels what does that do
nothing
all right i don't
i don't understand that okay i don't
like that
text color now i think we'll probably
want to make that one
white if i had to guess just to stay
consistent so let's
save that refresh the page
okay cool cool cool cool
um
cool all right we definitely need some
padding
i'm just gonna throw it on the on this i
guess so how did we do the other one we
just said
uh the div has padding right here right
right there
padding 100 so now let's add
some padding onto
the um
let's see on to the e
[Music]
no the button so around just hit
style equals
is it adding a gap between the
text and the top of the bottom
i add oh i don't oh is that what's
happening was it moving up
it could have been i wasn't really
paying attention to be honest
so it definitely could have been all
right so if you add it directly to the
css it updates automatically
if you add it here
at me nope it's just slow
[Laughter]
that looks so ugly uh okay i just take
my eyes off it
all right so hold on i'm confused i
think that's from my css file
is that 300 pixels though probably not
i'm just going to set this back to 0 and
10.
let's see that fix it
no it's not oh it's from this
so it the padding does not work here
all right oh maybe it's a margin
actually margin by top
and of course it wants me to set
everything
okay sorry i had to check a text from my
wife
um
yeah the button got really big but i
don't i don't think that i think that
was still
the padding
ah fetch the button's still huge why is
the button so big everyone
did i do something wrong all right i
probably need to
let's see
i pushed everything up i don't like that
a frustrating frustrating frustrating
frustrating frustrating
okay hold on i know what's going on here
i switched the wrong thing
i want to switch this i think
x here
padding
i think that's just i don't know let's
try it
[Music]
um
aha victory victory victory victory
victory victory
baby all right that's too big obviously
too big of a jump but we at least got it
working the way we want to and we can
actually copy that
style we can get
like um everyone's talking about yeah we
can put it in here
um
um something like oh fetch
like that
oh please tell me i didn't make an error
okay i think we're good um
and i do think that's h2s maybe a little
big now i don't know maybe h3 is the
happy medium
control z undo yep i have to do that a
lot
all right that looks great guys look
that looks
super good um i'm not sold on the
this button looking the way it does but
that's okay
i'm i'm gonna be okay with it for now
um because i mean it's gonna look pretty
good when it's
oh yeah shoot that's a good point though
because look at see how it's like still
high up here
and as i shrink it down
it gets pushed
all right i'll have to have i'll have to
have a friend look at that
um or maybe do it when my brain's not
fried
coding forever is long two and a half
hours
it's not frustrating doesn't count as
coding they had a meeting and made an
official rule
yeah exactly okay so we have we have
this uh
quiz button here all right i'm gonna
take it out of this mode how do i take
it out of this mode
that let's see
looks better now yeah looks better still
not perfect
but uh looks looks better that's for
sure
um i don't want this to be full screen i
want to be like that
okay now we can go back and forth that
looks a lot better huh
okay um
email and it's gonna be put an email
it's gonna take take me to the quiz
where i need to disable these until then
all right um
um um
i don't like how these are getting
smushed
so let's go take a look at that real
fast there's a couple ways we could
approach that
um save um
so that is in what file
that is in page one
and you'll notice that the div is going
65 percent
um right
right so actually what we shh
let's see so we don't care how big this
div is right
oh wait no we do
the question is how do i like make it so
it overflows
or is it fine no i think it i think we
need to
because like the whole left side's fine
or maybe it's just not that long
and i will say that on these we need to
add a margin on the bottom
so i actually think we're going to do
margin
autumn and we need to make it what do we
make on the last one
25 probably 25.
maybe a little less may 15.
okay save let's go back
you'll look pretty good though i think
this should
go into here it should probably be an h2
not an h1
if i had to guess okay that's still
gonna look pretty good
and i don't know i guess i'll leave that
for now okay
then next
um okay and that's gonna look great
i think this is the best looking page so
far to be honest
um i'm still not sold on how this looks
that's okay um okay so let's do the next
step
which is to ah
what the heck let's deploy it let's put
it on the internet somewhere
um okay so in order to do that
i need to make a decision about pricing
and ease of use
because it's going to cost me money to
host
man i'm out of water what time is it
almost one
yeah let's just keep going what the heck
someone type in
gcp deploy
um dash application
um
probably should have made a virtual
environment i didn't i'm not
i'm not huge on those but yeah i should
have the requirements.txt is in here
somewhere right
what no yeah it has to be
i don't see requirements.txt did i miss
it
see slides
require
oh man this is there right
um i'm gonna go check the website here
where i got this uh from originally
a template anyways from a guy named
russell romney what's up russell
shout out yes you do not have uh
requirements.txt
file that is fine i will create this one
in the just like regular section right
here
oh my wife's calling me i got i gotta
answer
i'll be back hold on
all right i'm back i'm back sorry quick
timeout
um okay so we decided we needed a
requirements dxd file right
um yep okay so let's just do
requirements.txt
um okay in this txt file we're going to
need
dash hotly
how funny would it be if she was
watching and called to tell him
where the requirements page was i wish
i don't think my wife is uh does that
um pandas well i need anything else
let's see what other packages am i using
um i guess
that's it
uh i guess requests too um and random i
don't
i don't know if we need those
just left over from the template but
we'll include them all right save
right save all right now you guys get to
watch me struggle through the stuff i
suck at all right
so no judgment i am not good at this all
right so
you can see i've looked at this before
multiple times how to deploy dash
application with google cloud platform
in app engine
okay
[Music]
um
[Music]
all right so first let's go into our
main.pi which for us
is our
let's see our app.pi
right
um
and yeah man i'm getting a little tired
a little hungry so hopefully i can do
this
uh what's index.hi
oh right here so here's the point
this is going to be rough what is this
oh it's just importing app on every page
is that right
import app okay we're good we're good
all right so server and port let's check
those
850 host i'm just going to put it at
0.0.0
i don't know what that means anyone know
what that means
martha you're still here too you guys
are you guys are stellar i can't believe
you guys are all still here
it's a long process huh um
all right let's just make the port 850
that's fine debug i'm gonna turn on true
okay and i have requirements txt file at
least a good enough one
okay um
i think the yaml can end up being pretty
simple i'm gonna cheat and look at
an old project i did
and find the ammo
um we're getting to the stuff i'm not
good at let's see
open in text edit
this is what it looks like
um
yeah so i guess
it looks pretty similar to this one huh
so let's just grab this we're going to
create a new file
really important let me replicate what
is in your manda
okay so i'm going to create a new file
again
uh app.yaml
i don't know if it needs to be called
apt i am
right i know i don't really need oh i
need that
i know
i don't know how this works a little
worried about that
i don't think i need the basic scaling
exactly
like that so let's see
oh it does have basic scaling i'll just
do that max instances two idle timeout
ten minutes
python three seven resources cpu
gigabyte gigabyte entry point
i don't know this handlers is yet so
let's just delete that
save
[Music]
okay
um now let's see
this is the tricky stuff this is very
tricky this is cloud computing data
engineering stuff
i'm not great at this so bear with me
bear with me
all right so i have the app at yaml
no i um
[Music]
version control standard all right so
now i think we can go ahead and try to
do this
oh i'm kind of nervous um
all right so let's go to
google cloud platform
i think i have some
love to see
um go to console
come on you stupid thing load all right
there you go sorry i said stupid again
derek
try not to um
let's see
um alrighty
so let's see i have a couple projects
we're going to go to here
a new project
this project name is going to be let's
see
i think we're going to call it data
career data career
quiz all right
um create
now
make yourself a
um hopefully since i made it i'm in
charge of it right
see so it says project info okay
how do i go there um
i get really lost really easily
inside of google cloud platform all
right there's data career quiz
nice project id project number add
people to this project
uh new members me
let's see roll
uh current i'm an owner yep
save
oh i'm already on this policy so i'm
good i don't need it
okay now what does it tell me to do now
is
on the google platform now it's time to
use the gcloud
set value okay
this is where we get really tricky and
we got to use the terminal
all right so we're going to do boop boop
um ls
all right fine let's type in
[Music]
no worries i had to unplug the laptop
from the tv
let her watch her lunchtime show sweet
hopefully the lunchtime show is pretty
good
i want to watch a lunch i want lunch i
haven't eaten lunch i haven't really
even breakfast i need to go eat
i'm in the zone um oh my butt hurts too
it's like been oh my gosh my dog's
outside still i need to grab my dog i'll
be back
my god
i don't know if my dogs had breakfast
this morning though let's see
sorry i'm gonna be eating again um
okay gcloud
config what's that project
data career quiz
i spell project wrong
oops that's wrong again
says i do not have access to it because
i'm probably signed in as a different
email so let's do
um let's see
leapfrog letter factory that sounds
pretty sweet
let's see gcloud set user
that's right
i'm gonna log in
okay now i should be logged in
let's try again
nice okay we did it
so far so good all right now we
type in gcloud app deploy
um i don't know probably us
west too
[Music]
live
oh crap it's building in asia south
i typed in you're supposed to type in a
value a number
not a text during let's see
yeah speech has had breakfast okay do i
want to continue
no again
i got some beef jerky anyone want some
beef jerky
um okay
sure i guess i'll change the area later
um crap
no good
hmm don't know what caused that
hmm not good
hmm
let's see why is this happening
no i've never had deer jerky is it
pretty good and beef jerky is so
expensive
[Music]
i'm thinking what can cause this
[Music]
p4 i don't know what p4sa is let's try
nothing if i can understand what that
even is
trivial bad success making sure all
settings are configured
outside
is that what it is
maybe it's uh
this guy
[Music]
i don't know what that really means
looks like it's working better now
though
i'll just see if it works
okay while that's loading
i gotta think going to do this database
i could just write it to google sheets
maybe
so one thing that's tricky is i need to
keep track of everyone's
email from page to page actually
and i'll probably need to make an id
because if two people get on at the same
time how do you do it
all right deer jerky is not cheaper i
love deer jerky
living in texas my whole life i've
always had friends who hunted and hooked
me up oh nice
that's awesome i've never been a fan of
deer meat too much
oh look okay
well that happened way too fast so it
says that it's working
um i do not believe it but let's go
ahead and try
um g cloud app browse
that was too fast i don't believe it's
working
i'd be amazed if it works
nope dang it
all right so then you do g cloud
log tails or something like that
um
g cloud fog tails
see
um g cloud
uh log's tail
it maybe i can go look inside of the
console here
or maybe i can use inspect to figure it
out
not sure not sure
console 500.
um let's see
so i think i need to go to the app
engine
section
i do not know where to look for the uh
logs
anyone know twas too good to be true it
is it's uh it's gonna take me like
an hour probably get this if i had to
guess um
so i mean i should be able to do
do i have to like say the app like just
g cloud
app logs tail like let's try that
waiting for new log entries uh well you
already got one it
didn't work refresh
nothing ain't getting
um
dang i thought that's how you did it i
do not know how to do it i guess
oh here's some logs that's good
all right so container called exit
let's see
so it looked like it was working pull
complete
[Music]
um
push done start
push done start
unicorn ah dum dum dum need
uh uh
on your requirements.txt file which i
still don't even see
where is that
didn't i had that sworn
i had a requirements.txt file oh my gosh
did i not
derek missed your networking comment had
a couple meetings yeah networking
difficulty is volatile when i felt like
i understood port forwarding and i was
able to
connect my nat protocol vm i wasn't able
to con
connect my host server despite being
open on my
router this one baffles me i haven't
gotten back to you i've decided to focus
on python
training a bit after that well coulter
we're back in the midst of port
forwarding kind of
um yeah well for some reason
my requirements.txt file never got
created did my yaml okay my
yaml did all right so let's just check
create requirements
txt and it needs to have unicorn
dash plotly maybe
pandas maybe good enough for now
now go back here retry
to do app deploy
now i should have to load one file this
time this is a long process just back
and forth trying to figure it out it's
going to take a while
yes i want to continue
um
i'm also going to need to figure out how
to do the database
you know what you guys might make fun of
me
but i might just use google sheets
the the one thing well you want to get
there
well you need to keep their whole data
the whole time
which is tricky because i don't know if
that's being passed
i mean it should
okay i'll you have to get all the ids
too of course
and then we'll just write it to a csv so
let's
let's test locally in the meantime
so i got that figured out the app yaml i
don't know if it's right or wrong we'll
have to figure that out
um okay so let's say i'm using my app
oh i can't open up a new terminal
okay can't do that so we need to decide
if we're going to be using
i think a google sheet would be pretty
sweet because i mean
it's you're not going to run into huge
issues i don't think
when they press that button we just need
to send it to
the database
which is going to be the google sheets
that way i can look at it and it's a
database at the same time
that'd be pretty cool um
the question is can i keep it all
recursively though let's see
all right so we're here we are ls yep
we're there
python main dot pi is out it is what is
it called
index.pi and over here
it's loading everything
so we're going to run it and what we're
going to do is to test
out we're going to go to the last page
which is called slides
last and we're gonna
see that's the thing is i think we're
gonna have to use
i don't know actually how to do this
because i'm gonna print so for instance
going to print oh but it could be saved
there
right html
um
[Music]
on another page and another page another
page
is that a callback i'm trying to think
i wonder if it even knows
i wonder if it even knows how how do we
know
okay there it is running okay
now it says it's running online it's not
going to work again
it's going to take years to get it
figured out at least we're on the right
track
still loading all right 500 air gotta go
visit the logs again
jump to now
okay here are the logs oh sorry
my dog's here she can't have the beef
jerky though
love you peachy but you can't be jerky
container called exit let's see let's
hide that
master arbiter worker and process
warner listening at
app valid
startup failed exit code three
app is listening
app invalid address
all right so let's actually i think my
yaml is probably wrong
let's go look at the ammo
8080 and let's look at that
oh that's fine index 80
50. see so that's an issue so that's one
thing that could be wrong
i doubt it's the only thing but
no way to really know other than just
keep trying
[Laughter]
so yep and deployed again
okay loading
and we need to think this through on
locally let's see
locally so we have
this page right here but the question is
can i get all this information
here so once
they've pressed oh and crap did this
get uncentered no come on tell me it
didn't get uncentered
all right we're gonna have to
okay i know where that's at actually if
we can fix that
because i did
um
that's because i told it to be
i need to put margin auto in here too
i don't know if those can coexist or not
we'll have to see
maybe it's actually padding
save hey maria
it'd be uh awesome for linkedin when i
when i'm using stream yard it only shows
me who's watching on youtube
it's not showing me who's watching on on
linkedin so unfortunately
i can't see who's coming in and out i'm
building a dash
application so this is an application
built in dash that i'm going to be using
to have a uh it's a quiz to know like
what data career you should go after
what
data career is right for you so i'm
building it from scratch i'm having some
issues right now trying to deploy it
let's see it says it's deployed i do not
believe it
we'll refresh it and we will check the
logs
jump to now i'm pretty sure it's gonna
fail
but maybe it will
it's thinking it's thinking
it failed all right let's see if i can
figure out where it failed though
maria says i need that yeah that's why
i'm building it maria
exactly
it's gonna be really sweet once it works
the problem is
i'm having a hard time getting it to
work
getting it on the web listening at
that address okay why is it
why is this 127 thing happening
um
let's see
[Music]
um
failed to detect the app
oh boy i think that means my yaml is
kind of messed up
um
[Music]
that looks okay app
run server
app server equals app.server
main runner oh i think this is it
i think this is it hold on i don't think
she should be main runner
all right this should be let's see it
there
there yaml has yammel
um up up
see they have main server
and then let's see server see they have
that right there
yep this should be main server i think
maybe that'll fix it
um and let's deploy
all right while that's going we're
thinking locally
how from page one to two to three is
that information
when do i send it to the database when
do i send it to the database when do i
send
database and i
think really what you need
is i think you're gonna have let's just
make even though it's um
these questions aren't necessarily the
questions i'm going to have
i'm going to rename this i'll
leave those quiz questions for now let's
just copy it copy paste
paste all right we're going to call this
one
tech questions
i'll talk this one i don't know
idk no we'll call it
person questions oh that's a terrible
name oh well
all right so we have person questions
and tech questions those are going to be
the same
we're going to do is we're going to go
to
uh page one we're gonna duplicate it is
that an option here
no just copy it paste it nice
and i call these page two and page three
um page two
and rename page
three and maybe we're just going to call
this one
yeah coulter does it is like the default
internal ip for something
um i'm not sure what's happening oh i
didn't even click yes that's annoying
gotta wait again all right so let's see
this is gonna be reading
uh person questions maybe
i know they're all the same
and this is going to be reading
uh tech questions
yep three right there
um and then
um these pages are also going to have
obviously different ones this is going
to be called like
tech skills
i don't know person skills doesn't make
any sense i know but let's just leave it
for now
um okay now what
no what no no it um let's check that i
guess still going
um i guess we can reload the other page
here
reload
and we're actually going to need a
button
on page three i think so how do we take
them from
because like page three or i guess this
in this case you need to have a button
down here
that's gonna say like give me my results
and i wonder if i take off
oh the nap are so nice though
i wonder if i take off the nav bar
all right it says oh
oh you can stream the i'm sure we add in
there so let's just stream them locally
here
waiting for new log entries let's go
here
refresh the page
um
another crappy air gosh darn
worker failed to boot
what did you fail to boot
hmm no module named
main okay that's a good hint that's a
good hint
i couldn't find main which is probably
here main
yes c it's not called main
it's called app or
uh index probably actually index let's
try that
all right we're trying again iterative
process
okay in the meantime i'm thinking
through
because i really don't want someone to
let's see
um yes i want to continue
if i'm on this page here
no here um
the navbar is kind of nice but really i
don't need it i just needed to
do whatever this does here
um because i don't think i'm going to
let people go back and forth to be
honest
yeah and then that's looks freaking
fantastic okay
so let's see what the navbar is actually
doing
this is gonna be the hardest part
[Music]
how do i do this how do i do this how do
i do this
um let's see
okay so we know where is that all that
happening is that in the
index what's happening in index
we do slide count current slide children
update slides show this
number total okay that's fine
let's see add the slides to the object
and display slide order okay that seems
good slide dictionary seems good
nav style nav button div helper function
to return the
navigation to return the navigation
busted buttons easily
so you can see that it has
text and it has width and that has
color
my mouse is so weird all right
call back lessons to the previous
buttons determine
next slide name changes next and
previous in the slide names
okay so look at this is like
the next link and the previous link
i don't think i really want a previous
link
i think i just want a next link
the question is
i don't even want a next link really
but see how it does it on each one
i don't know how to do that because it's
always there
derek says yeah i drove back a while ago
because i just thought it was fun but i
want to learn something about networking
i ended up realizing
it was something but i have to put oh
you'd have to put more time
and effort into than you really wanted
to this is again before i was ever
getting data analytics to slash been
thinking lately
looking back into it i don't know
nothing about what you guys are talking
about so
okay so the app it says is ready we know
it's not going to be ready we know we're
going to hit an air
let's go ahead and stream those logs
down here
um
looks like it's failed failed
failed fail fail fail fail feel all
right why did it fail that is the
question though
um
let's see if i can spot it in these tiny
tiny logs
all right
what i still saw that no module named
main
thing
right there no module named main
um do i have a main module i didn't know
i had one
main oh if
name equals main oh
what does my animal say camel says
yaml says
index i don't know let's try index here
i'm kind of just guessing
i might need to have a data engineer
come help me
i'm not good at this stuff i told you
a bunch of inners we try to re run the
whole thing
gonna have to press yes in a second
there it is
and then
back to this thinking this through
this isn't running either now
um okay so why think about this for a
second
it's just going the slide dictionary
plus one
current total
derek says i got a little side tracks
i'm not sure what part you're working on
now
i'm not either i'm trying to deploy it
to the to the interwebs
on the cloud so i'm doing that and then
the next part i'm working on
is i don't want it to um
i don't want it to have these i don't
really want to have these
previous and uh next buttons
really wait why
oh hold on why isn't this running
oh it just runs now because it's not
main.pi
is that what's happening do i make this
main again
over my head
okay now it's running again
makes me feel not great
you know i'm gonna change
i think i'm gonna change
what is does this use main anywhere
let's see
um maine
jesus main there
and then main.pie is the one
that has that right
so i think i'm going to change and what
is the app perhaps nothing
i'm going to change let's just see
index.pi
index
uh index.hi
index.pi index index okay
i'm going to change the index.pi
to something that's main.pi
rename
i don't know if that's causing my issue
but i want to just keep it as straight
forward as i can
this is going to be main dot pi now
how is this doing i mean probably failed
to be honest
i still know causing any of the errors
shutting down failed to boot
oh okay hold on it's i see
i see new error now i think i think
we're on the right track we need to go
to
um assets avery css no
we need to go to requirements.txt
and we need to add the other ones that
we are using
i thought for some reason dash was fine
with that i guess not
let's load that
let's load that
let's load os
and import lib i don't know
um save what else are we using in any of
these pages
martha says you'll get there i gotta go
for now excited to see the results
thanks martha you guys are here for a
long time thanks colter
uh appreciate you guys being here three
and a half hours gosh
oh gosh um
okay so i think that's the problem
at least one of the problems so i'm just
going to reload everything again
and retry deploying here
and i need to think about this again
so it's nice
so i think i'll probably get rid of the
next button
or sorry the previous button i don't
really like that
you get one shot at it for now
we'll just have the next button the next
button
and then when you get to the final next
one it's get it's got
it's going to take some thought
um
yeah cause we gotta like make this math
which is gonna work
let's add the other pages in for now
i need to go to
presentation
and need to add
age two
age three
um
[Music]
like that i probably press the yes i
probably didn't do that
yep waiting for nothing okay so that's
gonna go like that
on page three you need to get the
information
from page one two and three
all right
so
the question is on the last page
let's open up that one
the question is here and i
get information from
the previous divs
um okay
i don't remember how to do that
so let's try to find out
um dash um
call values from
is that a callback
i don't know i don't know what i'm doing
i'm getting a little
three and a half hours wow
uh no matching distribution could be
found
line seven
okay i don't think i need those dang it
save
all right guys i think i'm going to call
it a day um
three and a half hours um
pretty excited about this but i also
haven't eaten lunch
i'm pretty hungry i think at this point
i'm just getting
i just need to take a step back or to a
step forward and so i think i'm kind of
banging my head against the wall and i
think if i
just like take some time rest forget
about it for a little bit
i'm going to be a lot more effective so
hey i appreciate all you guys being here
with me
for three and a half hours you guys are
awesome hopefully you guys you know saw
some sneak peeks and got excited
maybe learned a thing or two um but yep
that's it for now have a good day

Title: Ask Avery - Feb 24, 2021

Description: Come listen to all things data science and personal brand questions!

Video Transcript:
[Music]
what is up everyone
it is wednesday february 24th
and we are live on linkedin and
on instagram if you are or no sorry we
are live on linkedin
and on what's the other one youtube
we're live on youtube
if you guys are watching if you guys are
dropping in please drop in the comments
and say hello
um i want to know who's watching and i
don't want i want to know where you're
watching from
okay i'm just going to get this why not
we should stream on uh
on instagram too right so hold on let's
do a little live on instagram
all right there we go hopefully that
stays
um okay but if this is your first time
joining this is the uh oh i need to find
a new
uh a new little tripod my other one just
broke
all right oh well there we go
if you're just joining this is the ask
avery show this is where you have a
chance to ask me anything
that you want about you know usually
data science or personal brand
um so you can ask me whatever you want
we have some people queued up for today
um but it looks like many of them as
always are
not here um if you're supposed to talk
to me today
and you don't know where to go or you're
in the wrong place
um send me a message on linkedin and i
can find you the right place
but i i gotta give i gotta give um
my guy here i'm gonna bring him on for a
second
giorgio is that how i say your name yes
giorgio that's perfect for me like the
first person that's ever been on like
early for one of these things everyone
else is like oh he's late or not here
oh i just gotta give him some credit you
just i think he's supposed to talk are
you at 5 40 or in 10 minutes four
minutes or and
you're like in 15 minutes really yeah
see guys this is how you do it you be on
time and you make me really happy
and yeah so anyways i gotta give credit
nice to make you happy well good job
we'll bring you on for your question at
your time just in case the next person
shows up but yeah we appreciate you
being here
um we got daniel hi daniel how you doing
we got my buddy
uh charlie hey charlie how you doing we
got jose
hello avery how's how's it going a lot
better than it was last week last week
was going crazy down here in texas
it was really insane it was like like we
didn't have water we didn't have
power for like a really long time so
it was it was pretty crazy to be honest
um okay i'm gonna message the next
person to see if they're coming too
you'd be surprised how many people don't
end up making it it's like what
where are you going where are you
supposed to be
hi are you going to make it
all right well in the meantime okay i'll
take any questions about data science go
ahead and throw it in the comments
and we'll take it for the next couple
minutes until the next person shows up
so any questions in the audience about
data science or linkedin or personal
brand we'll take them
any questions you want anything you want
all right giorgio's here i'm a mess next
couple of people
and let's see let's see
um
no questions quiet audience today we
usually got more questions than this
let's see um
any suggestions to boost linkedin
profile alright this is from
oh man i'm so sorry i'm going to say
your name wrong
nick hillishwar
i'm sure i said that wrong um and i
apologize for saying that wrong
okay but that's a great question i
really like that question how to boost
your linkedin profile um
my answer is this okay you basically
have
um you have only like a couple seconds
to hook people when they look at your
profile right
so it's really important that you have a
good profile picture so i'm gonna call
you nick
okay how about that nick you have a
really good profile picture it looks
great okay
but what about cover picture okay do you
have a cover photo
if you don't have a cover photo on your
linkedin you should have a cover photo
on your linkedin
it's very important okay so um we can
just go to mine
mine is not a good great example right
now okay
i'm gonna actually redo mine here in a
little bit i just need to find the time
to
make sure that i do it hold on let me
share my screen so you guys can look at
my profile
i can kind of show you what i'm talking
about all right here's my profile okay
it looks like i need to restart my
computer try tonight close
and my linkedin is not perfect i want a
new profile picture
um i like having a colored background it
just makes you stick out a little bit
um because like i said you have like
someone's gonna look at your profile and
you have seconds to like be like oh that
person's interesting
so the next step is your cover photo and
people
only like half i would say only a people
photo that in my opinion is acceptable
okay
your cover photo isn't it's at the top
of your like this is the top of your
resume on linkedin this is the top of
your profile
you have to make it look good you have
to make it look interesting okay you
have to make it like why should someone
stay on your screen
with all of this right so mine i have a
call to action let's connect
okay i tell you why you should connect
with me i'm passionate about these three
things
and a little description explaining who
i am
i like i said i'm going to redo my cover
photo actually um because i don't think
it's as good as it is
but you should really have information
about you up there like make
don't make that like some sort of stock
photo or just like
nothing like make it really important
make it
define who you are and make it more
interesting for who you are so that's
the
first one is profile picture second one
is cover photo third one
is your headline your headline is what
gets people interested
my headline right now also pretty sucky
not great um
but you need to have a succinct headline
that explains who you are
and what you want from people so you
could say like aspiring data scientist
or like a student or something like that
just make it very clear
that you are who you are and what you
want
okay and it's worth the effort because a
lot of people visit your linkedin
you can look at your dashboard to see
how many people have viewed your profile
you can see that my um profile was
viewed 14 000 times in the last 90 days
that is 14 000 chances for me to make an
impression on someone you know
and if you're if your profile is crap
then you're not going to get much from
it
so always make sure you have a good
profile picture a good cover photo
and a good headline the next is the
about section
um you can see i have emojis in mind and
i make it pretty detailed
i have white space don't just do one
long paragraph
you know put put interest and make it
look pretty um and then i have
other places you can find me um i wish
linkedin would let you make these be
links
so they could just click on it but
linkedin would never do that because it
takes traffic away from their website
so it doesn't really work out that well
to be honest okay so those are the four
things i recommend
do to have a better linkedin profile
it's a good question
thank you nick sorry you said i said
your name right i don't really believe
you though
so i tried though okay we got
derek all right derek said are you
invested in any cryptocurrencies
um i am uh not as early i owned bitcoin
a couple years ago
and i sold during that uh the original
big boom when it hit like like
like 20k or something like that i was
like oh that's sweet i'm getting out
um and then i bought back in recently
around
30k um i honestly don't know much about
it
and i'm probably not the right person to
talk about it but i own bitcoin
and uh i think i think it has a chance
to go up still
um i think it's interesting technology i
am worried about like i know bill gates
talks about how like
he's worried that it like encourages
the like dark transactions you know
because it's just so hard to trace um
that makes me worried so i
i don't know we'll see also in dogecoin
but i'm not doing super hot on that
i just think that's you know why not
it's like sixth sense
buy a bunch if it sucks it sucks but if
it takes off it takes off
all right danielle's got a question um
and i'm just gonna quickly just make
sure i'm not missing anyone's
um emails or anything because we're
supposed to have someone else and then
we got
then we got georgio he's already here so
we're gonna give him some time
extra time because he was here early we
respect georgio who's here early
i respect a lot of people but i respect
people who are on time
and who show up so i appreciate that all
right let me just make sure i didn't
miss any emails because i don't want to
miss anyone you know and they're like
oh i messaged you or something like that
let me just double check
yeah exactly derek doge to the moon
i'm all about that all right i haven't
missed any messages or anything so we're
good
um all right i'm gonna go back to uh
daniel's question and then i think we'll
go to giorgio okay
um and and i know daniel messaged me
about this if you could recommend a
masters in data science what would it be
okay let's take on that question with
the internets all right
um i add this back in add to stream okay
and make it big
okay here's all my emails um okay
so let's think if you had to get a
master's in data science what are your
options
that's the one i'm currently doing right
now i'm i'm just about finished i
graduate
in the semester um so there's i don't
know let's just do this data
science masters okay um
you have to think about why you're doing
the masters okay because let me tell you
something
i am doing a master's for the piece of
paper
and i think a lot of people do college
for a piece of paper because you could
sit in every college class you ever
wanted to for free
no one would ever ask you like are you
in the class or something like that no
one cares like you can walk into any
college campus
and take the class for free i mean no
one would ever question you you could
just go in there
but why don't you do that because you're
doing it for a piece of paper right so
i mean like you have to think am i doing
it for a piece of paper or am i doing it
for knowledge
if you're doing it for knowledge i don't
think a master is the best way to get
into data science
if you're doing it for a piece of paper
i totally understand it and i respect it
okay
okay if you're let's let's assume you're
doing it for a piece of paper because in
my opinion that's really the only reason
to do it
otherwise i wouldn't pay ten thousand
dollars i would pay like two thousand
dollars into a bootcamp if you're just
going for knowledge okay
but if you're like i want like a
master's degree no end ifs or buts
okay um there's a bunch of these
programs that are popping up there's
like a ton so like here's one from
eastern
um here's one from syracuse here's one
from berkeley okay
um here's what i think is the best you
need to think about when you're getting
masters
one is the cost okay how much does it
cost my master's at georgia tech
is about twelve thousand dollars okay so
yeah that's the price to be right there
it's completely online i really like
that format
half the classes have been good half the
classes have been crap um i went into
the degree already knowing a decent
amount like a lot about data science
like i was already a data scientist
before i got a master's degree
so maybe that's part of the reason why i
think it was crap but i mean there's
definitely like
like i said if you want to do it for
learning sake there's better options
okay um so university of georgia tech or
sorry yeah georgia tech's pretty good
i've heard this berkeley one's pretty
good um berkeley has a has like
does a lot for the community in data
science i don't know the pricing on that
one
um let's see the other one i want to
talk about
is let's see let's see if it's on here
oh i heard san diego's is pretty good
i've heard northwestern's pretty good um
the other one i want to talk about i
think i would try
oh it's not on here ut texas just put
one out that's competing i think pretty
heavily with the georgia tech one
on content and price um so i mean i can
only speak to the one that i've done
really but you have to really think why
am i going to pay 12 000
is it because i want to learn or is it
because i want i want the piece of paper
and either is acceptable but you need to
be very clear before spending any
thousands of dollars what your goal is
in learning
um so if you're like yes i need a piece
of paper
or i really want a job getting a
master's degree will make you more
likely to get a job
but it is not the best thing to do to
get a job
you you can get a better job without a
master's degree with personal projects i
guarantee that
the reason i know that is because i was
a data scientist before i had a
bachelor's degree because of personal
projects
so you just need to have personal
projects and that's what can make you a
great data scientist
okay with that i'm just going to double
check i think giorgio i think you're up
next so i'm going to bring you on here
in a second
let's see yes you are so let's let's
bring you on
and uh i'm excited to talk to you let me
remove my um
uh what's it called my screen and also
did you message me
well okay let i'll just say hi are you
from italy is that right
yeah i'm from italy uh even uh though at
the moment i'm working in the
netherlands
oh but that's how very european of you
to be
from from uh from italy and then working
in the netherlands that's very cool okay
what do you do in the neverland
netherlands
so i'm a phd and at the moment i'm
working on a heterogeneous catalysis so
it's a
chemistry basically okay what's your
underground
like what was your first degree is that
chemistry then or
sorry i i'm having some troubles hearing
you
okay hold on let me let me just make
sure that my
mic is where it should be hold on give
me one second okay
it looks like it should um let me move
it in um
what was your um oh much better okay
what's your undergrad degree like what
was your primary degree in school
so i got a degree in industrial
chemistry
so which is uh something between
chemistry and chemical engineering
i also have a good chemical
chemistry background but also know a
little bit about
reactor design and a little bit of yeah
chemical engineering must transport
phenomena
this kind of stuff so i also saw
on your linkedin profile that you are a
chemical engineer as well
yes that's true my undergrad is in
chemical engineering
albeit i i never was very good at it
but but sweet why i guess explain a
little bit why why you're calling and um
what you're hoping to uh i guess get out
of this
what what do you want to ask me what
what are you doing what do you want to
use data science for
yeah i have some questions i started the
this
data science journey almost one year ago
during the first corona wave i had some
extra time
so i started studying a little bit of
machine learning and
the science so i have some some question
for you
for instance i'm trying to build my
personal portfolio and
since i am an industrial chemist i would
like to work on a project that is
chemistry related or related to the
chemical industry
so do you have any suggestion or
data sets that might be helpful for this
goal
yes let's think um
okay the first one that comes to mind is
the tennessee eastman
data set okay so the tennessee eastman
data set is a really famous data set
um i really like it because it is it's
like real life so it's from
it's from tennessee a company a chemical
company called eastman
and um it's all about fault detection so
um when i was in undergrad i studied a
lot about fault detection that's kind of
where i did my research in
for a while and the idea of fault
detection is when you have like
something like big like a chemical plant
or a refinery right
you have a lot of things that could go
wrong you have like like literally
hundreds of thousands of sensors
and the process is very complex when
something does break
you want to figure out what broke and
how to fix it and why it broke okay
as fast as you can and so that's kind of
called fault detection
and it's it's a part of in uh in machine
learning we'd call that like anomaly
detection right you're trying to figure
out when something
goes wrong um and so that's a really fun
data set that i like it's kind of like
the standard for fault detection and
industrial systems
um and the data is pretty accessible i
think you can just download it
for the most part so that's the first
one that comes to mind um
i guess i guess is there like a specific
type of chemistry or is it just like
manufacturing or is it like like
batteries like is there a specific type
of chemistry or just chemistry
data in general yeah chemistry and data
in general because at the moment i'm
working on a telogenous catalysis so
mostly on
material chemistry okay uh but yeah
i'm also interested in uh reactors or
whatever also because if i have a sort
of physical uh
uh feeling of what is going on then it's
easier also for me to learn
it is yeah your domain knowledge can
like help you right
um yes um okay sweet so i'm also pulling
up hold on let me make sure
okay i don't understand this very well
and you might understand this a lot
better than i do giorgio
um okay i'm gonna share my screen and we
i see we got uh
manoj she's in the in the queue so hi
manoj we'll bring you up here in a
second
appreciate you being early as well um
all right
so one thing that have you heard of this
q-star before
it is a quantitative structure activity
relationship
okay yes and so i i don't know much
about this but you can look at qsar
machine learning i know this is a big
thing that they're trying to develop
basically like trying to predict
how um chemic like basically where
where electrons like how basically
chemicals will react um kind of based on
like a quantum
standpoint um so i think this is really
interesting i don't know any data on it
but i know this is this is hot
in chemistry and data science um another
thing that's really hot in chemistry and
data science
um i mean this is the whole study of
chemistry and data science is called
chemometrics um so um any sort of any
sort of chemometrics data is really
useful
a lot of chemometric data is often like
uh wavelengths right like from like
spectra
from like uh gcms or something like that
um so i don't know any data sets off the
top my head
but like for instance for you know two
and a half years of my life
i spent time classifying chemicals based
on their spectra
so that's like a classification problem
so you could probably go you probably
go classify um
nmr uh machine learning i bet you
i bet there's a data set on that um
not exactly sure what any of these would
have but
one way you can find data sets i don't
know if you've seen this before
it's called the google uh data set
search engine have you seen this before
no okay this is pretty sweet um
it's you know google's good right and it
has a data set search engine so it's
dataset
search.research.google.com we can go in
here and put like
um nmr classification let's just see
for those who don't know nmr stands for
something i can't even remember
um okay i spelled classification wrong
let's just do nmr and see what happens
uh this is this is over my head now
maybe this one let's just go let's just
go
um uh gc
ms let's just see what that has
otherwise that's gas chromatography mask
spectroscopy so here are some samples
and i don't know the last thing i would
try so this is hard because it's just
like the data
but you could also try um kaggle.com i
really like kaggle.com for all things
data science
you've been in there yes okay have you
used their
have you tried searching their data sets
there
uh not really i found some data sets
from not a books
directly some were pretty interesting
but i never searched directly for data
sets and also i'm not really sure if
you can use those data sets for
free for personal project or not
yeah most i mean uh the the google data
set
search you can actually throw on this
filter at the top that would be free
um so let's see how many of those stay
okay some of them stayed so those are
free to download um
kaggle would have a lot of stuff for
free let's just try let's just try
that is another fancy okay so like
here's something interesting
i mean it's a little biology i don't
know if you're a little afraid to get
your hands on some biology
but um oh wait i'm sorry i made you go
away um this one i'll zoom in for
everyone watching
oh i'll try i don't think i did um it
says ramen spectroscopy of diabetes
so that's that's a data set that um you
know at least has some ramen
spectroscopy which is you know date or
chemistry related here's another one
ramen spectroscopy for detecting covet
19.
that seems like a good a good project
that someone like you might understand
so uh those would be my two suggestions
is the google data search and then the
kaggle
yeah that's a really good suggestion
thanks
yeah yeah thank you so
still regarding the personal uh
portfolio and
projects what do you think are the most
important
algorithms uh that are often used in uh
in industry so before you were saying
something like
anomaly detection i guess i don't know
neural networks are probably not really
heavily used
uh yeah
it's it's a good question what
algorithms okay
you're gonna laugh okay but i would say
like most the problems can be solved
with
at least okay i always see data science
as
data science is only as useful as um
as the value that you can derive from it
so you can have the world's best
algorithm but if it's not like being
used
it's useless right like it doesn't
matter and so
i'm all about i mean whatever value is a
lot of the time for businesses it's
dollars right
i'm i'm in data science for the dollars
whatever dollar brings in you know
our our business money we're doing good
um
so i'm always about value when it comes
to data science
and i would say eighty percent of the
time the simplest algorithms will get
you
eighty percent of the value pretty
quickly um
and they're pretty simple so like if you
can do uh
multivariate linear regression that is
like
very basic but like it solves a decent
amount of problems
okay it's like oh your process is
non-linear and you're like okay crap so
i can't really use multivariate linear
regression
so then use a decision tree you know and
then use a random forest
and that that'll get you you know those
are pretty simple those aren't very hard
algorithms the random the random force
gets a little harder but
i mean those are all one liners right in
in python or one clicks and whatever
so i'm i'm all about like simple and
bringing the value
um but if you if you made me name like
what algorithms
that would if i said you had to know
five algorithms what would my five be
um i would say linear regression
decision trees
um i like this is like kind of biased
because my background but i love and
it's not even like
necessarily like i guess it's kind of i
mean it's not an algorithm
it's not a model but pca principal
component analysis
i think that's very useful um so that's
my third
i have to get one classification and one
clustering so i would add
k-means and then just uh uh
k-nearest neighbor i think for my
classification and then if i if i had to
calculate all of that i would say
that i'm a bad at deep learning it is
not my strength
i'm not good i'm not good at neural nets
i'm not good at it
so if you want to be better than me like
double down on all things neural net and
deep learning
because eventually that's going to be
really valuable and
i think companies and a lot of the
companies i worked for were kind of just
getting started in data science
but i think eventually this whole neural
net thing is really going to take off
and people are really
businesses are really going to be
excited about it
nice yeah thank you
yeah no problem um i think we got time
for
i know manoj is up here in a second but
knows are you good if we take one more
question
i think you can hear me okay i think
i think you're good um you want to take
one more one more question
yeah if there is time a quick question
yeah
yeah uh just a curiosity but
how data are handled in a company
is there a team of data scientists or a
company just collects data
and send them to a second company for
analysis
everyone is doing it differently i don't
think there's a right or wrong answer
and obviously a lot of companies now are
not data science companies but they're
using data science so like at exxon for
instance we're collecting data
and we're analyzing the data we're doing
both right
i can't say we did it very well but we
did both um
so i think it's different from company
to company and some companies are really
good at one thing
and not really like like some softwares
you know it's like sql okay it's great
at storing data but is it like that
great at like
like analyzing or visualizing it no it
can't visualize it like at all
but if you take something like tableau
or like power bi it kind of sucks at
like
storing it and moving it and
transforming it the things that sequel
is good at right
but it's really good at visualizing it
and so just like those softwares i think
companies are good at different aspects
and i don't know enough about like data
science companies to really speak about
like
which ones are doing well um i think i
think it's kind of a free-for-all
in the no code machine learning
platforms right now
i think i think it's really pretty
interesting i think there's a lot of
competition i mean
i i guess the the top runners in the
data storage space would have to be
snowflake i mean we saw them ipo this
year they're
they're making a lot of money i don't
know if that's good or bad and then for
the no code machine learning platforms
palantir seems to be doing really good
i'm a share owner i don't know much
about it but it goes up every once in a
while it went down this week but
um i think i think it's kind of a
free-for-all in that space so
i don't really know what other companies
are doing um but i know like a lot of
companies that aren't in the data sphere
will do both
okay nice
awesome well i appreciate you calling
from italy what time is it in italy
it's uh 1 1 a.m no it's not
yes it's 10 a.m you're up at 1am
yeah yeah
i i really like those uh this format so
thank you very much so thank you very
much for for your time
yeah you're very welcome i'm so glad you
were here early i really appreciate it
and um
you're welcome back any time are you
going to go to bed now is that what
you're doing
uh yeah i will follow the next uh next
question
okay if we have more time i'll bring you
back on too so
we'll we'll see you we'll see you in a
little bit all right thanks georgio
appreciate it
thanks okay we got menoge
is that how i say it or no am i saying
it way wrong
uh yes
how do you say it let let me learn
okay uh i used to call manoj
well i tried my best manoj where are you
calling from
i'm calling from india india okay
so it is 6 30 a.m is that right
no uh no it's just a there's one hour
difference it's 5 30.
it's 5 30. so you're up early yeah
because we know uh last time i missed
the show you know i'm really sorry about
it because
uh you know last time i joined the
google meet and uh
so i was just waiting for the oh was
this last week
yeah i think yeah okay yeah last week
was tough i
for those who weren't aware last week i
do this show every wednesday night
um usually around i guess a half hour
ago whatever time that is for you so 5
30 p.m central
um but last week i'm in houston texas go
astros i got my
my houston my houston gear on today um
last week i um there was a huge
snowstorm
in texas and um it took out all of our
power
for three days so we had no power so
i couldn't i couldn't do the show and i
also couldn't like tell anyone that i
couldn't do the show
i got a second of data that i tried to
put on linkedin and said i couldn't do
this
anyways i'm really sorry i'm glad you're
here minoj
um tell me what you want to talk about
what do you want to chat about
yeah uh you know uh i think i'm
pronouncing your name
good right no it's yeah it's perfect
okay thank you for you know uh first i
would like to uh thank you for inviting
me this show
because you know i've been uh trying a
lot to
connect with you and uh and
congratulations on your new position and
uh
for the entire snow data frank's team
thank you
yeah so uh ellie i know my first
question is
um i was from engineering background so
i did my mechanical engineering and
followed by that uh you know i
worked as a customer service executive
yeah uh so from then i know i just i
moved on to uh the software engineering
field
now okay so uh
so so far uh whatever i have learned all
right so what i have learned uh in the
software engineering field
is you know it is just by uh doing on my
own so doing some kind of a practical
stuff and
learning out of it yeah that's the way
to learn
that's perfect yeah so i just want to
know whether the same can be applied uh
to the data science as well
oh yeah 100 100 um
that's how i prefer it to be honest like
you can definitely learn everything that
you need to
on your own um there are so many and
like this is i mean you also have to
realize this is coming from someone
like my career now like my job is i
teach data science right
so i teach other people like how to get
started in data science how to do
projects
um what to learn and stuff like that so
this is coming from someone who's like
literal livelihood depends on teaching
people how to do data science you don't
need me
you don't need me you 100 don't need me
but you have to be disciplined
okay um because all the resources are
out there okay
um towards data science kaggle
youtube um i try to post stuff on my
linkedin
there's like a lot of resources for you
to learn data science
that are free okay and
i mean you can pretty much learn how to
do anything for free in data science
okay but let me tell you the danger
there
um the danger is you have to be
disciplined
and you have to you have to be very like
pragmatic about it because
um i am i'm a little overweight okay i
want to lose some i want to lose some
pounds this year
and let me ask you this minoge do do i
have to pay money to lose weight
yes you think so
uh not really but you know uh if you
want to get into area
so but uh if you want to get into
environment where you know where each
people come to
uh lose their weight because you know it
automatically naturally creates a
curiosity for us to lose their weight so
if you want to you know as you said if
you want to follow a proper curriculum
proper environment yes yeah so that's
that's most important
so definitely you know we can try to do
on your own but definitely we would
stuck in somewhere in the middle right
so you know it would be great to
have someone uh who can help us to guide
us
to how to lose the weight yes you're 100
right that it's you don't need someone
you don't need to pay money or you don't
need someone to lose weight but it sure
does help
okay um so i the way i'm doing it this
year
is um i'm running races so i've i've
like scheduled four different races that
i'm running
and i paid money okay i paid like i
probably paid like 600 bucks to run
these races this year
six hundred dollars and i mean that's a
lot of money but it's like
now i'm motivated because it's like i
don't wanna i don't wanna lose out on my
money right
anyways it's kind of the same with
learning something it's like you don't
need someone you don't need like
a like master's degree or a program or a
boot camp or anything
to learn for learning's sake but often
we as humans need some sort of like
push in order to do it and that's often
money
so anyways i'm sorry that was a really
long answer for your question so to
answer it very shortly
you can learn a lot about data science
online and you can get hired as a data
scientist
with no real educational background it's
a little bit harder
but it's possible 100
all right thank you thank you so much so
um you know just moving on to
next question which is um for example as
you said uh there are a lot of
resources available online right uh even
for the free of cost
so uh the problem as i said the problem
here is you know uh i've been
starting on many years so but you know
i've been stuck in somewhere in the
middle
so i was just you know trying to find
you know how to get over it because you
know uh
there are a lot of resources out there
and uh but you know uh
just for me and i'm just i'm a little
confused you know as to
uh how to start right for example um
because i've been starting i've been
starting all the
all the different courses online and i'm
just you know i'm just reaching to some
extent
and after that you know i'm just
checking because uh due to some reasons
i'm unable to figure out you know
whether whether the path that i've
chosen to learn the data science is the
right
is the right one
okay so you're wondering
so if i make sure i understand correctly
you've tried a couple different courses
a couple different places to learn
and you get started and then you kind of
get to a place and you're like am i
going down the right path
is that is that the question yes yes
exactly okay
well what's your end goal right because
if you got to think about what your end
goal is because
if you don't know what your end goal is
it doesn't it doesn't matter which way
you go right so what's your end goal
yeah to become a data scientist okay
you want to be you you want to be a
generalist you want to be like a
specialist at something or
you're not sure yet and you need more
information to explore
oh yeah no uh i want to be a you know
special in some field okay okay but you
don't know if it's like computer vision
or like natural language processing or
you're not sure what field but you
eventually want to specialize
uh i'm much industry now bioinformatics
oh and bioinformatics okay very cool um
very interesting um yeah bioinformatics
is super cool and genomics is super
cool um okay so that's that's kind of
that's your end goal is becoming a data
scientist in bioinformatics okay
so you got to think about okay what is
going to get me there so in order to be
a data scientist
you need to have a couple different
skills right
you need to have data retrieval skills
or data storage
skills right and data cleaning skills so
um the the best thing to know is
probably um
sql have you ever have you ever used sql
yes oh uh and i know i know sql okay
you're comfortable with sql all right so
check that box out you don't need a
course in that okay
the next one is python how comfortable
are you or are
some sort of scripting language which
one do you do you know either of those
oh i know python and java
okay python and java okay so if i said
if i said um like for instance i'm going
to give you a data set
i'm going to give you a boston house
data set okay
so the boston housing data set for those
who are is
aren't familiar is it's basically a
bunch of houses
is the rows each each row is a house and
the columns are the features about that
house so
does the house have a pool how big is
the house how many bathrooms does the
house have
you know what neighborhood is the house
in and then the last column is the price
of the house
could i could i tell you hey create a
linear regression machine learning model
that would predict the price of a house
based off of the number of bedrooms
square footage the pool like could you
do that
you know uh i know that can be done but
i know i'm not that much uh
okay okay okay so that that's that's
where you need to go then it sounds like
you know python
but you need like an intro to machine
learning class is what i would say
okay so okay let me tell you there's two
options that i would recommend for you
okay let me let me let me pull this up
hold on give me
um like that i think and then i need to
add this
okay here are my two recommendations
okay
the first one is on kaggle okay go to
kaggle
kaggle.com this is this is where i
learned a lot about data science and
they've only gotten
better go to this compete tab
okay kaggle has data sets and they also
have competitions
so like competitive um data science
basically
okay but we're not going to compete
we're going to go to this um
at the top oh man i guess
i've participated in these so they're at
the top
but somewhere in here you should you
should be able to find
like maybe they're in playground let's
click on playground and see if it
filters
oh no let's try one more i'm getting
started
okay i don't know where they are at but
you'll find
you can search this titanic machine
learning from disaster
house prices advanced regression
techniques those are
those are the two i would recommend
starting with okay and what this
is is the exact problem just walk you
through is there's a lot of
it's a big data set a big csv we can
look at the data actually here
and this will explain the problem it'll
show you the data
so here is the uh training set
right here it's so like here's the idea
of the house
here's how much the zone it's in and
here's how much
the size of the lot is like the actual
like
land here's what type of street it's on
um here's the shape of the house it has
a bunch of data and it has a sales price
what you can do is you can go to the
notebook section
and you can see people like post what
they did
like to to this data set like what did
they try doing
um and you can go look and you can sort
by
um most votes so these are like the best
notebooks for this particular uh
introduction to data science basically
and you can click
on the top one and this guy did a really
good job walking through
everything you need to do to solve a
data science problem this is basically
what i teach people right here is i
basically teach them how to do this
i'm more fun than just reading okay but
i
i basically just teach people how to do
this and this will explain everything
that he does you see he does
distribution of the sales price
he does some scatter plots and then he
eventually does machine
learning okay so that's that's one
really good way that would learn
machine learning the cool thing is about
kaggle okay
is like let's say you want to do this
right um
menos is you can just hit copy and edit
and it'll like basically take everything
he did and put it in your own document
and then you can add stuff to it it'll
put you in yes so for instance it's
opening a notebook here
and you can actually run his code and
you can like change thing in his code
and it like really helps you understand
what's going on
so that's that's my first recommendation
the second recommendation i have
is uh self self selfish
but it's a good course so i'm gonna i'm
gonna go inside anyways but go to
averysmith.com okay
okay this is my my uh coursing and data
science education
site so here i am right and then i have
my courses are listed here so i have a
coaching call
i have this intro to data science live
webinar series which i'm doing right now
actually
um this is today tonight will be our
third night but take this course
have you taken this course yes oh you
did
yeah okay you're yeah that's right i saw
you in the comments now that i think
about it
okay so you've taken this course okay
how did you feel like the machine
learning went here
yeah it's been wonderful because you
know i i know i need to complete the
course but you know it was uh
it was awesome well good
okay so you've done you've done one
thing of machine learning at least right
here
so now do this other one and this this
then you'll
then you'll have like a good background
and then what i want you to do
is go on to kaggle and sorry my
internet's being slow i have too many
windows open hold on
um let me close this i don't think
okay so go on kaggle and find one
in bioinformatics okay because i don't
know much about bioinformatics but i'm
sure there's one so
let's see let's see if we can go to
competitions and maybe there's one in
research
okay here's one identify glomeruli
in human kidney tissue images okay
that's a little harder because it's
gonna be images
images are hard machine learning that's
tough um
so maybe not that one maybe maybe we
search maybe we'll search for one maybe
we'll try ready let's just try
bioinformatics
and see what comes up um we want to do
uh competitions in bioinformatics
oh these look pretty hard we got auto ml
that i guess automl isn't that hard
anyways this is this is what the type of
thing that i would do is i'd be looking
on kaggle for bioinformatics notebooks
that you can kind of look off of and
learn about
and then i would be doing i would be
spending you know
10 minutes every day on towards data
science
in the bioinformatics section if i have
one let's see if i have one i don't know
if i do
oh yeah check this out towards data
science is like a publication
um okay where you can learn about data
science and they have this
bioinformatics uh section where there's
gonna be
all these different course all these
different tutorials on how to do things
in data science in bioinformatics and
this is this is going to be great for
you because
you can click on one of these let's find
one
that i think would be suitable for you
let's go back
okay machine learning and bioinformatics
genome geography
okay i'm going to click on this story
it's going to open up
and it's going to be like some sort of
tutorial or explanation about
how data science is used in genomics
this is a really cool graph
it's going to tell you how to install
the tools get the data you need
and then do some quality control and
let's see what type of mapping it does
let's see
down here does a heat map
of correlations ooh does
some uh clustering with t-sne this is
like a really powerful
uh model so anyways i'm sorry i'm kind
of probably boring you and droning on
now
but my my point is this manoj it's that
it goes back to that fir that question
you asked
at the beginning is can i learn data
science on my own and the answer is yes
you just have to spend a lot of time
poking around in different places and
the best places to poke around in my
opinion
are kaggle and towards data science so
spend your time there and look there
um and i hope you find something good i
think you will
yeah uh really you know uh the materials
that you showed you know it was
really interesting for me to look at all
this daily data you know because i was
really not aware of those things but now
it makes you know uh
it's awesome thank you yeah of course
you have you have a direction now right
it's going towards data science that's
where you should spend your time and
you'll find something good
okay got it fine
okay sweet what other questions you got
from me you got any you got any more
questions
uh i'll just work on you know uh that
your suggestions i'll just open to
the kaggle and towards data fans i'll
just know i'll try to plan as much as
possible from those two resources and
i will see how it goes and so
two thumbs up i i think you're doing
awesome and
i mean anyone that has i'm apple i'm
gonna pull uh giorgio back
up here too we'll have all three of us
on here uh any
i'm not worried about you guys let me
tell you why anyone that is
waking up at 5 00 a.m or staying up till
you know 1
20 a.m uh you guys you guys are gonna
figure it out okay
you guys are gonna put in the effort and
you guys are gonna figure it out um
just spend as much time you know on
towards data science and kaggle as you
can and and then if you
and then i mean to go to minoj's point
if if eventually you're feeling like
kind of lost
or confused that's when it might be
worth you know doing a course
um and i don't know i mean in your case
i think minnows you'd want to do like a
very specific bioinformatics course
that i don't know i don't know which one
would be a good question um
but i mean there's a lot of free
resources on towards data science
kaggle and then the third would probably
be youtube um
those three have a lot of good stuff on
there so check those out and then once
you've exhausted those or you feel lost
in those
um that's when you might want to do a
course at that point
sure okay cool well thank you menos
those were very thoughtful questions i
appreciate you waking up early and being
here
so uh it's been a pleasure audrey uh
thank you so much for having me on the
show
and really you know i wanted to say a
big thank you for for everything that
you do if you know for helping the
people around you know
to learn and sharing the knowledge you
know not much you know just come forward
and do that
so it's been a really awkward thank you
thank you so much
well you're so welcome thank you for
taking advantage of it i appreciate it
manoj
yeah have a good day bye all right
georgio we got we got some
we got nine minutes left before i go um
if anyone else has questions they can
ask questions
i know uh dustin who i'll be uh hanging
out with here
um later tonight is just said i love the
astros hat yeah
astros hat and astra's shirt dustin so
double right there um and before i go
back to you giorgio
i i got a message or a note here from
from
jamie there's a lot of info on how to do
the code
but more difficult to find the what
which model
methods and why from what i'm
experiencing all right jamie that's
that's a good point
i'll have to think through that more and
i hope that my future courses
and content will take that more into
account um jamie actually
send me a message um if you don't mind
about like your experience
and let me let me see if i can figure
out how to uh
make that a better experience for you
and other people
um but okay giorgio tell me what you got
any more questions we got eight minutes
i have uh other questions so
one uh one of the during one of
your last uh ask every uh
you were discussing about no profit
projects or uh yeah well projects for
non-profit companies
yeah so i never heard of that
can you discuss a little bit more and
where i can find this project
um that is a good question and that's
very noble of you first off
very cool um yes
so for those who may have missed this
previously what giorgio is talking about
is i'm a huge believer and you know we
just talked about it with minoj i'm a
huge believer in learning data science
through projects and like doing um
someone i'm teaching a course right now
and someone's like what book do you
recommend to learn data science and i
was like oh
i don't recommend the book i hate
reading like i don't want to learn in a
book i want to learn by doing
and of course books are useful to follow
and you know guide so
that's not like my full i'm not like
against books but
but it's like okay what what project can
we do that's helpful
how can we make projects and and what
giorgio's asking is okay
if i don't have experience or i just
want to help you know what what are some
ways that i can get
a data science project and one thing i
talked about previously is
non-profits they have opportunities and
they'll take you
to do any sort of uh data science for
them right
so georgio's asking okay well where can
i find some of these non-profits
um that do data science okay
so the first thing i want to say let me
pull up my screen again
is i'm going to say kaggle again and let
me tell you why hold on let me see if i
can find it
okay let's see
um let me see if i can find this
um okay i can't but kaggle
did this uh covid 19
competition this is back last year a
year ago
um yeah here it is i think it was really
hard to use actually
um i tried to help on this data set um
but
it was text analysis and text analysis
isn't my thing but originally
yeah this was a call to action um that
when we didn't know covid was
okay the white house basically gave a
bunch of data and they're like hey help
us understand covid more
and so they they gave a bunch of data
and they're like help us understand
copid and so i tried to like
to learn something but it was just i'm
not very good at text analysis if i'm
being honest
so kaggle this is on kaggle so kaggle
sometimes has like non-profit
or like for help opportunities
um but there's uh an organization and
let me say
the data for good hold on let me see
uh let's see
data for good let's open that up
and let's open it up here and let's look
up
uh data kind i think was the other one
let's see i'm not totally sure to be
perfectly honest
i've only done covet help i've
i've never done non-profit work as a
data scientist but i know that there is
people who do um okay this
looks like uh
uh
i don't think that's useful let's go
here empowering communities through data
download our information sheet here are
our chapters
some of our work okay so they have case
studies okay
they have case studies and upcoming
events
okay so i don't know what if there would
be a place there
that might help are you a non-profit
with a need for a data project okay so
this i mean this is like where people
can come to them
as a non-profit and say hey we need some
help i think you can volunteer for them
i just don't know where it is i don't
know maybe you have to join a chapter
i don't know okay but that's that's one
option
it also looks only canadian that's a
very canadian thing to be nice
um okay look at okay here's one data
kind datakind
um datakind right here um volunteer with
us
harnessing the power of data science in
the service of humanity
submit a project or volunteer with us
okay
so look at there's a spot a volunteer
spotlight
volunteer with us click
do good with data apply choose your own
adventure community events networking
and quick consultation to help
organizations begin their data science
journey
dang i want to do that that kind of
sounds fun that's really nice yeah
yeah then you got data dive weekend long
marathon style events that help
organizations do
initial data analysis exploration and
prototyping dang that sounds fun too
and then data core long-term engagements
that help organizations use data science
to transform their work and their sector
oh very cool okay
it can be a good driving force for uh
trying to learn and apply data science
skills
yeah that you're doing something good
yeah
yeah i think it's pretty cool yeah if
you want to volunteer this is a great
way to do it i've never actually
seen i know i've heard about this but
i've never actually seen it so that
that was pretty interesting um to bring
that up so thank you for asking that
georgio
yeah that's uh that's really nice i will
take a look at both
yeah thanks okay yeah and let me know
let me know how it goes
um all right well thanks giorgio i
appreciate you
once again being on and i'm glad you
stayed to the end because that was that
was fun for me
i actually you kind of inspired me i
want to do i'm really busy right now
but i would love to like do a big
hackathon
with all of you guys on linkedin like
just spend the whole
weekend like helping a non-profit and
me helping you guys too so you guys
helping the nonprofit and me helping you
that would be really fun
that'd be a really cool event so i like
that idea
so thanks georgio all right i'll talk to
you later
let us know okay sounds good yep bye-bye
okay so that's the ask avery show we got
a minute left i know he's got a comment
here from
uh sangita something that was very
helpful good i'm glad
i really like kaggle i like towards data
science those are great places to learn
and we have a comment here from humong
or yumang
i'm a subject matter expert in finance i
started familiar myself with python
my goal is to work with data scientists
and help them solve real world problems
um in finance with my knowledge
how much coding do you think i should
know to potentially lead or work with
data scientists
you should know a lot about data science
but very shallowly i would say i would
say you have to know
a lot of the algorithms like what how
they work
you wouldn't have to know how to code it
actually i don't think you even need to
know any coding at all i think you just
need to know what the algorithms are
and what they do and how they work but
you don't need to know how to code the
algorithms
so if i if if i brought a problem to you
or if you had a problem
for instance i you know i just released
a free course about predicting
the stock market python and you that was
the problem that you brought up to a day
scientist and you said hey
i want to predict this um where should i
start right
um or you're gonna direct the data
scientists to where to start or
something like that
you just have to be able to speak to
he's like okay well i did or he or she
is gonna be like i did a random forest
and like the variance seemed pretty high
i don't know if it's going to work
you have to know what that phrase means
okay so i would
focus less on the coding um because
you're not going to be doing any of the
coding
and more on the stats in math and
model making behind the actual words
like what do the words mean not the
coding so hopefully that helps you mong
or you ming
um just last notes because i gotta hop
out of here i got a busy night
i am doing uh another webinar tonight
in let's see in two hours
i have a half hour break right now and
then i'm going to teach my intro to data
science course for an hour and a half
um it's too late to sign up for that
unless you want the recordings which are
actually going to be still pretty good
but i'll do more courses like that in
the future um so yeah i got a busy night
so i appreciate everyone watching like
siva here avery thanks a lot for the
great insights
you're uh you're totally welcome um
minoge you're totally welcome thank you
for
for being here and giorgio thank you for
being here you guys were the only two
people who came
and you guys were both early and you
guys don't know how much that means to
me
because i literally i literally get 30
messages
messages a day asking for 10 minutes of
my time and then i give it away and then
people don't come and it's kind of
frustrating
so i really appreciate you guys being
here thank you it means a lot to me
um and everyone else watching thank you
for your comments yamang i hope that was
helpful
um olu wachemi you're so welcome
on where to start hopefully it helps um
hope you guys have a great night and
we'll see you
you know we'll see you late meets later
tonight at 8 30 i'm doing so in two
hours i'm doing
what the heck is python um oh i just saw
a question here before i end uh
jamie asked a question how do you get uh
the spa
spot to hop on the show i have a sign up
link
um that i posted on my linkedin
previously um but
because okay because like people like
giorgio and menos are so awesome
and they're waking up in the middle of
the night i kind of feel bad so i might
um i might start doing things a little
bit differently about
timings and what day we do it on and the
whole signup process
system i have right now is not working
people are not showing up they're just
that's not coming
so we need to rethink the system um so
be on the lookout on my linkedin
for a um spots to to post
um to grab a spot but i mean the spots
are free 10 minutes
anyways hopefully get one jamie send me
a message and i'll make sure you get one
um okay guys have a good night i'll see
you at 8 30. i saw dylan
hopefully that he'll see me there too
thanks man appreciate it
i'll see you guys 8 30 for what the heck
is python with dustin scheinmick i don't
say his last name hopefully that was
right dustin correct me if i'm wrong and
that'll be on linkedin
on dustin's page um hopefully there's a
link somewhere on my profile you can
find
all right see you guys have a good night

Title: Ask Avery - Feb 10, 2021

Description: Come learn about data science and data careers! It looks like we have two slots open so we will be taking questions from the audience as well!

Video Transcript:
what's up everyone
happy wednesday it must be that time of
the week again
it must be time for the ask avery show
so super glad you could hop on linkedin
i didn't really post about this before
so hopefully you guys just remembered
i'm just trying to get my lighting
going here nothing really good lighting
wise um but yeah super excited to be on
and we're gonna have hopefully some
some great guests here in a little bit
um
but uh we also have some openings so um
if you guys want to be on um i think
we're gonna have
i mean assuming no cancellations and
last time there was some
some people that didn't show up so uh
but assuming that doesn't happen i still
think we have
the six o'clock to 6 20 uh
central time so that is in let's see a
half hour basically
we'll have 20 minutes that are open so
we'll take some questions
from the the audience and
um we'll take some questions i mean if
any of you guys you know want 10 minutes
to talk to me
throw it in the comments right now tell
me right now so that i can uh
i can reserve that spot for you because
i would really like to have one of you
guys up here on the show
you know so we can talk face to face you
know um
and actually like hang out for a little
bit that would be that would be awesome
um so if you guys want to do that please
let me know i'm gonna pull up let's see
pull up the feed here if you're watching
please say hello
you know just stay where you're watching
from so i can just say
hey what's good to uh to all you guys
um definitely want to check you guys out
and and say what's up
so uh yeah oh nice we got we got yousef
nice how you doing yousef let me throw
your name up here
hope you're doing well glad you're uh
checking in
on this show we're gonna get started
hopefully in two minutes we're gonna
have our
first person on the show where they can
ask anything they want
let's see all right we got a
mana hello watching from seattle hey
mana how are you doing
hope you're having a great fantastic
wednesday
wednesdays always feel like uh hump day
right so you're almost
you're almost over throughout the week
okay let me add this here
i always have to make sure that no one's
on the google me because i originally
thought i'd be doing this through google
me but uh
um i do it through stream yard now it
just works better
so we got narenda watching from maryland
hey
narendra how you doing and we got this
shroot
choke from new jersey
hey this route and i'm so sorry if i
slaughter your names guys i i apologize
sincerely if i do
um and then we got uh brandon brandon
what's good
happy to be watching watching from
houston hey i'm familiar with houston
i'm in houston right now
um houston's a good place to be we got
yousef
he's in louisville uh kentucky
nice um okay so
we're about a minute away from when our
first guest is supposed to be here
but let's give you some thoughts that
i've been thinking about today um
i spent a lot of my day working on the
predict the stock market with python
course that is actually
um premiering tomorrow it's going to
drop sometime
tomorrow depending on when i can finish
it up so that is going to be a free
course where you're going to learn about
stocks you're going to be learning about
python you're going to be learning about
machine learning and data science
and how you can combine all of it to
make
a great algorithm to predict the stock
market so i'm very excited about that
course
um it's gonna be really fun it's gonna
be free
um it's gonna be watch at your own pace
you can check it out it'll be on youtube
and on my own website so if you guys
haven't seen me post about that
go to my linkedin and try to find the
post from yesterday or today
so you can take a look at it um but it's
i can't post a comment on linkedin
that's right
but my website is avery smith dot podia
um it's going to be a really fun course
and i'm just finishing up the last
details to
to make it go live tomorrow so if you're
interested in stocks or you've been
thinking about stocks or
you want to learn python or data science
that'll be a really great class for
for you to take okay and that is 5 31
and so let's see um let me see if this
person is coming or not
um i was pretty excited for this person
to come so dang it if they don't make it
that's a bummer um
let's see um i messaged and they haven't
been active
for 11 hours darn it so we will assume
that they are not coming
so if any of you guys are interested and
you guys have a question
put it in the comments um and i'll i'll
take it right now because we're gonna
have 10 minutes
of free time it looks like because we
didn't have people show up
i know it's hard sometimes especially
with the global audience
people get the times wrong they think
it's am versus pm and stuff like that so
we'll give them the benefit of the doubt
but we'll take some questions from you
this is awesome
if you guys want to come up here too and
just talk to me for a couple minutes
that's super sweet
um say i want to come up in the comments
and i'll shoot you a link on linkedin
and all you gotta do is hop on the link
you don't have to show audio or you
don't have to show video if you don't
want to we can just talk audio
we got rim oh i'm sorry if i say this
wrong
remember from india thanks for watching
and we got uh najwa from malaysia oh
very cool
very awesome we got vance watching in
spokane
uh washington that's great
okay so what questions do you guys have
for me what can i answer for you
um go ahead and throw it in the comments
and i'll i'll take it up
um uh if i mean i really want to take a
question from you guys
so i mean if you have a question ask
away um
in the meantime while you guys are
thinking about questions or typing in
your questions
i'm just going to go ahead and show my
the
course that's coming out tomorrow so
let's see share screen
and make it that screen right there
um actually we'll just make it a chrome
tab how about that
new tab okay nice
but once again i want to take a question
from you guys if you have a question put
in the comments i might i'm going to
make that my priority
but in the meantime i'm going to be
showing you the uh
the course that i have coming up
tomorrow we got hassan hi from iran
wow hi hassan i know a little bit do you
speak persian
i speak a little persian i can say tori
i think that means like how are you and
then we got elio
watching from new jersey or jersey city
new jersey
all right awesome okay so once again if
you guys have questions put in the
comment
i will take any questions on data
science how to get started in data
science
how to go from engineering data science
how to build a personal brand
uh tips for linkedin posting any
questions are fair game happy to answer
anything
i'm gonna go ahead and throw it here
onto this link
um and i'm gonna go ahead and just show
you so if you
google avery smith um let's see podia
let's see what pops up here
um okay not what i thought i was hoping
for
it looks like you can get to it because
you can get to my uh my instagram but uh
let's go to avery smith dot podia
dot com how about that oh wow still
doesn't pop up they need to work on
their seo i need to work on my seo i
guess
so let's i'm just gonna go to that uh
link
avery smith podia.com check out here
i got a message
yes um
okay um let's see we got
jana from houston hi jana and we got
siva
from california and okay
once again if you have a question about
data science put it in the comments
i please please please i'm begging you
i'll answer anything right now
we got five minutes till the next person
comes and i've already confirmed with
the next person
that they are coming i believe um
hopefully
i did that um okay so
let's see we have uh oh i'm sorry
wait what am i showing you i'm showing
you this page so this is my website
averysmith.com
just a little bit about me right the
thing i really want to tell you about
is this course predict the stock market
with python this is going to be an
awesome course
i'm really excited about it so you can
see it's coming soon it'll be released
tomorrow
but if you if you go to
averysmith.podea.com
you can click on view course and that's
going to pull up the
page for this course and it says predict
the stock market with python learn how
to predict the stock market using
machine learning
in python for free okay
um and you can go ahead and sign up with
your email right here um
you can go ahead and enter that and
click sign up so you can get all the
updates i'm really excited about it
you can see that we're gonna be covering
stocks python and data science
and uh this is these are all the
contents here so we have an introduction
section
we have a what our stock section uh
a link where you can get a free stock
which is super good
um what is python
what is data science and then we
actually get into the coding of
predicting the stock market
right here um okay so
i uh i saw we had some questions now so
i'm gonna throw those up
we have four minutes until our next
guest is supposed to come
so let's go to a leo was the first one i
saw
is a master's degree needed for data
science
the answer is a big fat no it's
definitely not needed
a master's degree doesn't hurt but it's
not a necessity
you can definitely get into data science
with just a bachelor's degree
to be honest i'm of the opinion you
don't need any degree to get into data
science
um but that's that's probably a little
bit more radical of thinking
i really just think you need skills if
you can program and you can understand
statistics
i think you can get all of that from a
course and i try to teach data science
and i don't require that people
you know have a master's degree to do
that so as long as you understand
programming you understand
statistics you understand storytelling
you can get into data science you
definitely don't need a master's degree
so thanks for that question elio um
on a different note uh yousef says can
excel alone do the analytics analysis
for a big organization
and the answer to this is a big fat no
it can't
at least for a big organization um excel
is awesome it does some things really
well it does
it does some things really well and it's
really easy and everyone knows how to
use it but it is not a data science
ready production system
people use excel as a database it's not
a database you actually need a database
once you get enough data
and enough structured data you need a
database that's the
the best way to to do data science
and then you're going to need scripting
and i'm just telling you that vba is not
the best scripting language out there
it can't do that much there's not that
much already like made for it
i mean there's a lot made for it but
it's not like sustainable um so python's
a much better option or
are those are kind of the two languages
for for data science that i suggesting
suggest um but excel can get you pretty
far and it's a great start
um especially if you don't know anything
else it's a great place to be
so yeah thanks for that for that
question yousef
all right we got two minutes so i'll
take another question let's see
let's see we got let's go to
as real tableau versus power bi
um that's a good question i like power
bi but that to be honest
that's just because that's what i've
used mostly i think they're about
sixes they're both really good um i know
if you if you listen to my friend roshan
khan
he will say that power bi is 80 data 20
visualization and tableau is 20
visualization
or is 80 visualization 20 data i don't
think that's exactly true but but the
the concept of it is true um i think
tableau is more in
demand and i think it's a more finished
product but power bi is free and comes
with a lot of
microsoft 365 accounts so i think a lot
of people like tableau more i think it's
probably better as a software
software but learning power bi might be
more applicable because it might be used
in more places because it's just that
the cost
um so good question there okay
um so i'm gonna just go ahead and make
sure this next person
i'm gonna hop on the next google meet
call just to make sure i do not miss
them
they should not be on google meets but
there's a chance that happens
so let me just make sure that doesn't
happen join now
and let's see i'm going to message the
next person to come make sure that
they're on
what is their last name look at it one
more time okay
oh no sorry
all right they're coming so we'll have
someone here in a second okay
so we got some some more questions it
looks like i'll take those until
our friend kapil hops on he should be
here
very shortly um so we should be seeing
that pretty soon but i'll take
maybe one more question let's see um
how to build proper portfolio for data
science people so hi siva
building portfolio is very hard i don't
know if i can cover it in like a one
minute answer
but every time you do something you need
to talk to talk to someone about it
post about it on a blog put it on
linkedin add it to your github
do not do anything without posting it
somewhere
um and that could be hard when you're
working for a company if your company
doesn't want you to post it don't post
it
there's definitely iep and security
reasons not to post all your work
projects
but any of your personal projects or
school projects those should be on the
internet for people to see
and that's a good start it doesn't
really matter where you have it
linkedin's a great place to build it if
you have like a wix or like a wordpress
website
that'll be great um any of those will
will work really well i think
um so yeah it doesn't really matter
where hopefully
that answers your question um okay
kapil's not here yet so let's keep going
on
um let us go to abe
abe what's up abe how do you go from
coding and jupiter notebooks
to production code what's the deployment
process like
watching from new york all right so
thanks for telling me where you're
watching abe
um going from jupiter notebooks so those
who aren't familiar with jupiter
notebook
it is like a python solution
um where you can basically kind of
like i don't want to say joke around but
you definitely
can kind of explore data more and
explore programming more
than like actually putting something
into production it's like when you have
input
people aren't using your code you're
just kind of doing it to investigate at
first
right and so getting it from jupiter
notebook
to production ready is pretty
interesting there are some
some like cloud solutions that will
actually let you deploy directly from
a jupiter notebook and they're actually
jupiter notebook based
so i know databricks has quite a bit
like this um so there's some cloud
solutions and production solutions
that'll let you run straight from a
jupyter notebook
but most of the time you probably won't
want to be in scripts and there's
definitely a big difference between
you know exploration and putting things
into production
and it's something that i'm still
working on and i end up rewriting my
code most the time
from jupiter notebook to production i
just i mean
it ends up being copy paste making some
functions putting it more in like a
scripting form
because jupyter notebook is usually what
i'm doing to explore but what i'm
usually
doing to explore is not what i'm doing
to actually put into production
so good question i appreciate it uh yeah
it was a great question
on my message one more time
okay um let's see
we got a lot more questions here let's
go to haas on
if you're supposed to hire a data
scientist what would be your criteria to
choose
among the candidates okay so i
now run a company called snow data
science where i do education i try to do
teachings
like this um if you missed it earlier
i'm
i'm releasing a course tomorrow that is
free
okay hold on looks like
why isn't this working
long give me a second
i might have sent the wrong link
uh i did
oh man let me send a quick message to
all these people
actually this link
oh boy
okay um
all right that was my fault
anyways i'm releasing a course tomorrow
called
predict the stock market with python so
i make these courses
and then as well i as i do consulting
for companies in data science and
uh so i actually end up hiring data
scientists and the number one thing for
me is to have a good portfolio
okay with that being said i'm gonna go
ahead and pull kapil up
kapil welcome to the stream how are you
doing and where are you calling from
hey erie thank you uh i'm calling from
dallas
oh cool nice you're you're another texan
like me i guess
yeah yep yep agree thanks for uh the
invite i appreciate
that yeah of course and i apologize for
sending you the wrong link i
i accidentally sent last week's link
instead of this week's link but now
now you're here and i was like hi it
doesn't seem like
ended because you were just chatting
with me so
[Laughter]
well well i'm sorry um okay so i saw
that you're a people analytics manager
um and it seems like some you have some
analytics experience
what would you like to discuss what what
can we talk about
so sure so here's the thing um
i i have quite a bit of experience on
the backend data
uh sql data warehouse and things like
those
last four or five years i've jumped more
on the analytics side
like three years ago i did a boot camp
on r
and to go a little bit more deeper on
the analytics side
so i have uh one data scientist
whom i managed and then there are like
two or three other data developers who
are more on the
automation side or things like that now
what i'm trying to do is i'm trying to
sharpen my skills on the
data science stuff i don't deal with it
on a day-to-day basis i
interact with my data scientists but i
don't do
a lot of hands-on and
one thing what i'm realizing is when
applying to
when i'm applying to senior roles uh in
other organizations
some reason they are looking for some
very deep expertise on hands-on and
which is okay it's just that it's not uh
in my
day-to-day work profile right now so i'm
looking for some recommendations
uh what what kind of uh resources would
you recommend
uh to just sharpen and
do a little bit better on the data
science side of things
yeah okay so if i understand right
you're like
these these jobs they're like hey like
what experience do you have and you
don't necessarily have like the hands-on
experience in the analytics space you
have a lot more and like
kind of like the data engineering world
like database building
and sql and stuff like that um yeah okay
so i definitely recommend doing personal
projects so it's a little bit annoying
because you have to like spend some time
outside of work the majority of the time
making them but it's totally worth it
because
to me like when i'm hiring data
scientists i really want to see like you
actually have done some work
and you can actually show that work to
me via a project and so
i recommend having like even if it's
just one project that's usually enough
especially if you have like a niche or
like an industry
that you're trying to get into um so i
like to show people
so if you go to um
let me actually hold on let me share let
me remove and then let me
share my full window here
stop screen then reshare
share screen let's show the entire
screen
here okay so if you go to my
personal website which is avery
jsmith.com
this is what i used as a portfolio when
i was applying for data science jobs and
nothing has to be this fancy at all it
can just be like a simple wix website or
like a simple squarespace website
but i have this portfolio button at the
top and this this pulls up some of the
projects that i've done like in school
or in boot camps
or just on my own and so if if i'm like
applying to a job and
let's say i i come from an engineering
background so let's say it was
it was in engineering or let's say i
want to try to get an mba job just
because i know that this this has more
analysis
i want to work for a basketball team i
can click here
um and i can click this article it's
like this
little blog that i wrote that talks
about my project where i got the data
and then it kind of shows some of these
data visualizations that i made
um and and so kind of like if i was
applying to a job
in the mba i would be like hey look this
is some relevant experience that i've
done
with mba data um you know this is
physical evidence on my portfolio you
can see it you can read it
you can go as much detail as you want
and this is a great way for for you to
get experience like in a non
stressful situation right it's just on
your own time and
then it's also really good for you to be
able to show off your skills and say hey
you know look look what i've done in
this related fields next next to this
type of job that i'm trying to get into
does does that make sense yep it does it
does i mean i did not
really think about doing a personal
project i was thinking more on
how to make uh you know be more involved
in our project working at work but uh
that makes sense i mean if not if the
work transformation
is not that simple because there are
like so many different things involved
so maybe i should do a personal project
and
i'm definitely open to do that hands-on
i mean i did that like couple of years
ago
but uh that knowledge is not uh if as
i'm not using it every day
uh it's it's not as uh fresh as you
would be
uh and that makes sense but i think
that's still even valid just go dig that
up and
and put it somewhere where people can
see it right like if
if it's buried in your computer no one
can enjoy it um
we had a comment from from my friend uh
juliana
she said help non-profits as well with
your skills
so that's another one is it's kind of
similar to personal projects but it's
like
more real world example but you can do
some good in in the world
if you're also trying to do it at work i
would like do you have the opportunity
at work to do it often or do
you have to like seek out are you doing
goodies yeah i do have quite a bit
uh i mean definitely opportunity at work
to
uh be engaged in that kind of work okay
yeah i i don't know like i think every
place is is different right so i don't
know exactly
um what might be useful hold on let me i
need to send oh wait
let me see all right here
um so i don't know exactly like what
your work is like and what opportunities
might exist
there um but i mean try try to put your
foot in
any place you can to to get those
projects i don't know if they're like
competitive to get
or or what necessarily the plan is but i
would always be
on the lookout for projects that you
know that you can perform well with
and that can help you build skills as
well i think those are good projects
right
okay so one additional question i have
so
if you're a data scientist what is your
expectation from your
manager provider it's a good manager
like then what is your expectation
yeah that's a good question um i think
it also depends on like the manager's
experience
um because i've had i've had
some managers that have more knowledge
about data science than others you know
um but for me a big thing for me and
this is maybe just me personally
but i consider myself to be somewhat
creative to be somewhat innovative
and i hate to be stifled i do not like
feeling like i'm in a box
and i can't like go outside the box i
can't color outside the lines
um so that's one thing is i don't want
to be like
stifled i don't want to be like oh you
have to do this it's like well no i
don't think
that's the best the best way and if that
manager really has a lot of data science
experience and analytics experience
then i understand like we can have a
conversation about about the why
but if the manager doesn't have as much
knowledge i'm like i'm doing all the
work and
like i know the technical like i really
want to do it this way so that's
probably the first thing
is just like to have flexibility um and
then the second thing
is just to have the ability to like
to not micromanage me you know like
don't babysit
but but also like be supportive and like
if i need someone to just listen
listen and i mean that's hard i don't
have those people skills necessarily
but those are probably the two things
that that i appreciate in a manager is
giving me my space to to let me be
creative technically
but also be there supportive if i need
it but don't be there too much that
you're annoying
i don't know if those are good answers
no definitely i mean
i've been managing people so i
definitely respect
uh the i mean employees space
and i know how important it is i feel
the same way and i expect similar
uh from my managers as well so
definitely
good point yeah yeah
what other questions i think the next
person isn't here so if you have any
more questions that's fine or
or if you're good we can we can go to
the audience as well
i mean yeah i mean i'm fine going to the
audience okay
well kapil i really appreciate your time
and yeah thank you for your two really
awesome questions i hope i hope those
answers were helpful
yep definitely thank you yeah have a
good night
all right so thanks kapil really
appreciate that um those are some
some awesome questions um i think i
think he's probably a pretty good
manager i don't know what you guys think
but i think those are probably
uh pretty good pretty good answers i
just want to make sure
i don't even see the next person hasn't
been online
i'll just say their first name so i
don't embarrass them oh okay
um can you hop
in the car if you want to be on
let's see if they end up coming this is
always kind of hard i need to figure out
a better system
hopefully they'll come in the meantime
while waiting for them we'll take
the next call here or the next question
but hopefully the next caller will be on
here in a second
um i kind of answered hassan's let's
move to jasmine
should i take computer science courses
after obtaining uh an ms in statistics
to better
prep myself for data science career well
i guess it kind of depends how much
data science did you feel like uh that
you learned
um oh i gotta get to mj here
mj thank you so much avery but it's 4 am
here and 7 30 have to be at the office
mj appreciate you being up late that's
awesome thank you for joining appreciate
it
um i saw i see your question here i'm
sorry i didn't get to it yet
um i'll try i'll try to answer that in
another video hopefully this week or
something but thank you i appreciate
that mj
um jasmine okay well how much how much
so
should i take computer science courses
after obtaining a master's in statistics
to better prep myself for a data science
career
um well i guess it depends on your your
master's in statistics
like how much coding did you learn did
you learn r did you learn python
um to be a data scientist i mean there's
different types of data scientists and
there's different roles within data
science
and those different roles will require
more or less programming
personally i'm a pretty program heavy
data scientist
i think most roles usually are but
there's definitely roles where you don't
have to be
definitely having like the know-how in
statistics like i'd say i'm a better
programmer than i am a statistician
and it sounds like you're probably a
better statistician than you are a
programmer
um so it really just depends on the type
of roles that you're going for
and what you're aiming for but um i i
definitely think having some computer
science knowledge is good
at least being able to to program and
to to program in python or r i think
would be really helpful
so hopefully that answers your question
jasmine i definitely think
taking some computer science classes
would be good i don't know if you need
to take them
from the university just taking them
online or just going onto youtube
depending on your skill level i on my
youtube channel i have some python
introduction python but you might be
past that i don't know really your
experience
but there's lots of good resources to
learn to learn python and that's the
program that i would suggest learning
um okay let's see what other questions
we have okay so
let's see um let me try this other link
hold on give me one
second because this person should be
here
um let's see oh it
joins i double joined my feet that was
kind of crazy
let's see let's see let me try this
other one
okay
there's a lot of good people that signed
up today that i was really excited
to to hear their questions i was really
excited to answer them
and they just didn't show up which kind
of makes me sad
okay
let me send one last message
and let me make sure this next person's
coming hold on give me a second
okay um let's see if this person helps
them
all right mj what are the best uh
open data resources for demo data
science projects
i mean only for self portfolio but
industry oriented
okay so there's really some really good
places to find
data data sets one would be kaggle
kaggle has a great data set section
where you can really search and find
good data sets that are that are free
the other one i really like that people
don't know about is google google has a
data set
engine data set search engine where you
can
search over a lot of different websites
for different data sets
about half those are paid a lot of those
are from a company called statistica
that has paid um
okay that person's not coming bummer um
but there's a lot of really good
resources
for to learn to learn and get data from
the
kaggle and from the google search
uh data set engine those are those will
be my two resources to look for
so hopefully it answers your question mj
i think you had to go
i'm gonna cut this up and i'm gonna send
it to you in a separate video later in
the week so
um okay anyone else have have more
questions
let's see go ahead and throw them in the
comments
i'll take any questions you got i know
um
juliana was here earlier and mentioned
doing non-profits
if you don't have any experience in data
science or if you even just want to
improve your
your experience in data science um
definitely try working with nonprofits
because
they'll let you help if you want to help
and they have awesome real world
examples
and you can help out in the world that
is like such a blessing to be able to
help
with a skill and learn at the same time
so highly recommend doing
data science projects for non-profits
it's a really good
experience overall all right mark thanks
for the question
mark what are the things you would like
to see in a data science project for
students leaving school
okay so in a data science project
it really depends on like what i would
be hiring for or what type of job you're
going for
and in what industry but they kind of
have similar structures
um in some ways so one
i want to see you actually getting data
i think i think that's
key um that can be from you generating
it like i
you know i wear an apple watch that
keeps track of my steps that generates
data
you could web scrape if you're just
pulling data off of kaggle and it's like
in a csv
that's fine it's not the best but that's
fine so that's number one it's like the
data acquisition
the second part is data cleaning you
want to make sure that you've cleaned
your data you've made it look good
that's a skill that's definitely really
important data science so there's
probably some sort of
data cleaning method there number three
is data visualization i want to see some
graphs i want to see some charts i want
to see like some exploratory data
analysis
um and yeah basically see some charts
i think that's important and then number
four i would love to see
a model you know some sort of machine
learning model or some sort of algorithm
implemented
whether that's you know nlp or whether
it's linear regression
or a random forest whatever
classification i don't care
clustering good any sort of algorithm in
data science is good
and then lastly i want to see the value
i'm going to clap again the value
i want to see the value i want to see
the business problem you're solving
i should have probably said that number
one that's all that matters is you're
solving a business problem
that's all i really care about is the
value that you're bringing with your
data science project
try to solve a problem um and then
lastly
the last part is and this is if you want
to be a full stack data scientist
there's really different roles for data
science i consider myself a full stack
data scientist
but there's not there's good parts and
there's bad parts of that one of the bad
parts is
um you don't really get good at anything
you're kind of a generalist jack of all
trades specialist none right master of
none
and that's kind of where i'm at but i
kind of like that so that's fine
but uh deploy if you can put your tool
online
and host it in like a flask application
or a dash
application some sort of endpoint that i
can access and actually play with the
with the project your myself that's
awesome and that's really what sells me
that's what i look for when i'm trying
to hire data scientists people that have
taken it
from data to production and like i said
there's not that many data scientists
that can do that it's kind of what we
call the unicorn
the full stack data scientist and
usually those full stack data scientists
aren't always good at every
piece of the puzzle that's definitely me
i'm a terrible cloud
deployed production data scientist i can
do it though
i can do it i'm just not very good at it
um
and so you might want to like specialize
and have your own niche like maybe
you're like a machine learning engineer
and you're really good at making
deep deep learning uh models
that's not me um and it just depends on
what you like i guess
so whatever you like and what industry
you're going to your project's going to
change
but overall should have those those
steps in some way or another
or really specialize on one step of the
project very depth
very thorough that's what i want to see
from a data science project mark
hopefully that answers your question
okay what other questions do we have
here
any other questions in the comments
let's see let's see go ahead and ask one
because uh
i don't think we're gonna have anyone
else show up the rest of the time
so um i'll take any questions from the
audience
and yeah let me know what questions you
have because i mean this is your time
to to ask anything you want don't be shy
so let's see
yeah of course mark you're welcome
always happy to help where i can
what's the sign up link derek do you
mean for
the for to be on right now on ask avery
you mean for the python course tomorrow
if you want to be on right now just say
i want to be on in the comments and i'll
just send you the link
in uh in linkedin messaging
that goes for for everyone hopefully no
one's messaged me that i miss them i
don't think i miss them
no i haven't missed anyone that's fine
um okay well with that it doesn't seem
like we have uh
too many people that um have any
questions
i'll give it a couple more seconds um
but in the meantime i'll
i'll just reiterate that i have a course
coming oh derek wants to be on all right
let's send the link to derek thanks
derek
sending you a link right now copy the
clipboard
eric
um let's see let's see
oh where'd you go derek
there you are
messaging
all right derek there's your link you
should be on really soon
bam right there
um let's see let's see
who else anyone else can you do
projects duplic all right so while
derek's hopping on
i'm gonna ask i'm going to answer sin
syringe
sends question sorry if i bet your name
i'm sorry
can you do projects depicting business
value when you are a student
won't business data be hard to find
online no
it's super easy to find online there's
lots of applicable places
uh to find um oh i'm so sorry linkedin
user i can't i can't see your name
um can you send me a message and then
i'll send it right back i don't know who
this is
privacy probably on your linkedin um so
it's really easy to find data
sources online uh look at kaggle
k-a-g-g-l-e has really great data
sources
and then google data set search engine
has really good sources there's so many
places where you can find data
that like have business value like there
are companies
on kaggle that release their data asking
you to solve it and if you solve it
really well they'll pay you 10 000
that's like actual uh business data so
that's totally available as a student
for free you can have access to lots of
good data sets
all right so we got someone else
hopefully hopping on
that messaged me i'm sorry i don't know
who messaged or who who commented
earlier but send me a message
right now and i'll give you the link
right now in the meantime i'm going to
pull up derek
derek what's good how you doing hey
avery it's finally
finally nice to get on a big follower i
love everything that you're doing and
thank you for having me on yeah man of
course i really appreciate it i like
your hat
uh that's awesome um anyways uh what
what do you want to talk about we can
talk about anything
so uh currently i just got moved into a
new position as a
data scientist and was given uh rains to
uh pull in a team
and uh currently my position was uh more
of a python developer
and uh my history i have a phd in math
so
oh wow it's been three or four years
since i've been in the the statistic
realm so just looking for some advice on
uh
like putting your own team together as
like a lead data scientist i'm trying to
obviously i'm gonna have to build some
silos and
we're migrating to azure so just any
type of
you know comments or just building a
team of data scientists around me
yeah that's a good question and and to
be honest i i mean
i'm going through a similar thing right
now where you know i started a business
and i need
um i need to hire people and so i'm
trying to think you know what what's
important to me what do what do i care
about
um and so i mean i'm going to answer
this but i'm going to tell you that my
answer is probably not any good and
your answer is probably better than mine
we should be asking you the question
probably
but uh for me this is what i'm what i'm
thinking about it's like okay
what am i good at what am i good at you
know what what are my strengths what am
i actually good at
so it sounds like to me you have like a
great math background
right like you know math like that's
super important
to know and it sounds like you've been a
python developer too so you know python
um so those i'm just guessing those are
two of your strengths um
so then you can think about okay so
maybe like what are some of my
weaknesses
for me i even talked about this earlier
i'm not great at
cloud and you just mentioned that you
guys are migrating to
to azure and it's like okay so we want
to put this stuff into production
you know we want to be you know having
these move-in models we want to be
retraining often
so it's like okay maybe i get a data
scientist or maybe they're not even
called data scientists
maybe they're an ml ops right machine
learning operations or maybe they're
a data engineer and they're going to
help you get from your your database set
up they're going to help you get your
data pipeline built you're going to do
your etl for you
um and they're going to help you do that
i don't know what are your thoughts
there just like
what do you feel like like maybe like
your weaknesses are like and how someone
can
help you there my weakness is definitely
building the pipelines
uh yeah definitely need help on getting
the information from
where it currently is stored to a more
usable format
and send it over to the cloud yeah
that i think a lot of data scientists
struggle with that and
um to anyone watching in the audience
who's like maybe not in data science and
wants to be in data science
like let me tell you data engineering
might be the place to be
because data engineering it probably has
like the same pay as data science
but i just feel like it's way more
needed and way less competitive
um i think it's a little more boring
personally but it's like very enabling
to to do that like you really help out a
lot of data science
teams by doing that um so i
i really recommend you know data
engineering i think that's a
a great place to be um and
it's something that like i think a lot
of data scientists struggle with
and so it's interesting derek it's like
how do you find the right
data scientist that's really good at the
pipeline
and personally i think people like like
i mean
i don't know if i'm if i can claim i l
i'm like you i have a bachelor's in
engineering like i don't have a phd in
math
but uh people like you who have a math
background or people like me who maybe
have like more of a domain
uh background we provide one thing i
think i think people that transfer from
computer science to data science
often have more of that pipeline feel it
seems like so those those might be good
people i don't know
yeah i would completely agree from the
people that i've talked to that have
more of a computer science background
are more into the uh the data mining the
building the pipelines and streamlining
the process
yeah i i so i'm just finishing up my
master's in data science and
last or two semesters ago we had a group
project
and um and and that my degree is like
multi-domains
and so it's it actually like the class
you could take if you're getting a
master's in computer science or a
master's in analytics
and it was so funny to see like what the
project was like for these people who
are getting the masters in in computer
science
they like saw the project in a whole
different way than i did they were like
i want to like set up the pipeline and
like the api
and i'm like oh i was just going to make
like i was just going to make a
regression model
a linear or a way a logistic regression
model and so they see like data science
differently than us so
i mean my my my sense is it sounds like
you'd be and i don't know how much like
stuff you have going
on but it sounds like you want to be
doing pipelining cloud stuff
so my my piece of advice would be at
least for like the first high or in the
first couple hires is
try to find someone that that is a data
scientist that
really has the engineering background
the data engineering background
or just hire a data engineer i don't
know and
just to touch on what you said we cannot
find that
engineers for anything like they are
everybody
they're just hard to find yeah i believe
that data scientist is way sexier
um but i'm sure the pay is pretty
similar
um it's just you don't get to say you
you do machine learning i guess like you
don't make models you move models
yeah and i have one more question avery
yeah what's up
well my background is more in like a
partial differential equations and
oh wow so that my research work was
actually with partial differential
equations and i'm just waiting for a
breakthrough in
pdes to help the accuracy of machine
learning models do you have maybe
anything that
you may think about this because i did a
lot of sensitivity analysis research
and predict you know testing how small
changes and model parameters can affect
it so
i'm waiting for a big breakthrough in
that and hopefully uh i'll see it in my
lifetime so just wanted to get your
thoughts on it
hopefully you'll make it in your
lifetime derek that's what i think
um yeah so i i took pdes but i took pd's
as an engineer so i
like understand like the bare basics and
and that's definitely math over over my
head
but i mean i mean literally pdes are
what govern the world right i mean
especially in my background in chemical
engineering like uh
all of the the equations can be
simplified to like ods but
but i mean if you really want to get
like the nitty-gritty of like how does
how does a fluid flow over a surface
that's all pd's based and
you have to have huge like you know
number crunchers like your
where it's actually swations and and i
be honest i'm not super familiar with
the integration between the two
but it does seem like there should be
like a solid relationship just because
of the amount of equations that you have
to solve and and maybe there's also some
sort of like
you can take pdes and you could like
maybe solve them
more quickly or or at least like maybe
not as accurately but you could have
some sort of like a crazy artificial
neural net that like represents the pd's
so yeah i mean i'm not well versed in
the in the space but i i definitely
think
something will happen sooner or later
that makes that math a little bit easier
i don't know how but uh
you let me know how you did it okay yeah
and just
your visualization visualizations are
just gives so much insight and that's
that's where i struggle as
you know someone that needs to get this
product to show my executives
that's one thing i do struggle with so
any advice on to
you know we're looking at you know we
have power bi right now
and i use uh dash and plotly a little
bit oh nice
but um just any insight or any
information on to
uh maybe how to visualization i just
my team struggles with them and so do i
yeah that's a good question
um what what industry are you in we are
actually a nurse staffing agency so our
okay
we have grown about 400 percent in the
past oh wow
so we're growing that's crazy yeah
my wife's a nurse so that's cool um
there's
i mean that's hard to learn um i have a
lot of books
that like talk about data visualization
in in general
um there's one in particular let me just
grab it here
give me a second
this one it's called uh oh
bad lighting storytelling with data yeah
storytelling with data
from from cole mathlik she used to work
for google
um it's a pretty good book i really like
it um
it talks about like how to make graphs
just like kind of simple and
and eloquently um and not have too much
junk on them i have like a lot more
complicated books
over here too um but i really like that
one um the other one that's really
interesting and derek i don't know if
this is up your alley but let me show
you it okay the other one is called
observe collect draw okay and it's a
visual journal
okay so it's it's a little it's a little
out there but it's like
this like gets my creative juices
flowing so it has like let's see
47 different like journal entries and
some of them are like one sitting some
of them
are like one month long but it's
visualizing basic things in your life so
like for instance this one says
visualizing what i eat i'm visualizing
my swearing
visualizing my friends birthdays
so like it's that's a good one that that
kind of gets you know
gets you thinking the other thing i did
was i spent
all of last year posting every day on my
instagram one visualization
and that was like i mean that's a big
investment that was really good just for
me to like kind of experience and like
see
what other people are doing so i i draw
a lot of inspiration from others i think
that's that's probably the best answer
yeah and that's honestly how i
i would say i met you i saw one of your
race charts that you made
oh yeah and uh you know just it's
you know i just i just love the way you
visualize information and take it from
abstract to
you know more concrete and if you if you
have any uh
any data visualization visualization
courses i would love to sign up for one
so
okay could you share a share of maybe a
link in the comments and i would love to
sign up for that
yeah man i appreciate that i appreciate
the compliments um
that means a lot i'll i'll definitely
think i i don't have one set up yet but
i
i would definitely love to do one
because i think it'd be pretty fun so
appreciate you derek uh those were
awesome questions we got one more person
we got to get to but
love to talk to you again sometime send
me a message anytime thanks
man talk to you later
all right hello annie annie how do i say
that
and you're on me oh there you are hi
yeah you can call me honey
okay how you doing annie i'm doing good
how about you
yeah doing good where are you calling
from oh i'm calling from north carolina
and yes yeah sweet that's awesome what
what do you want to talk about thanks
for uh sending me a message sorry i
couldn't see your name earlier
thanks for sending me a message and yeah
what do you want to talk about yeah so
i'm a mechanical engineer like you i'm
also not from a
computer science background so what do
you um
what are the options for me you know and
i have signed up for the
analytics at the georgia tech too so
what kind of
yeah so what kind of a career path to
take what are your suggestions
yeah so when moving from a
non-traditional career
into data science i always suggest
something i call
a what do i call it a side stepping job
i think is what i call it
and that is a job that is not like data
scientists it's not like a data
scientist role because you're probably
not qualified for that uh
right now but you will be soon don't
worry um
but you need a job where you can use
data in your day-to-day work and you can
do that as an engineer
um i don't know what type of mechanical
engineering do you do like are you doing
like
like cad stuff or or what do you do yeah
something i work for an automotive
company
so we make a lot of like tesla we make
the components for tesla and everything
yeah okay so you do mostly design yes
okay design design's the harder one that
i don't have a whole lot of background
in so my background is in chemical
engineering
so all of my engineering experience
i mean there is a lot of design in
chemical engineering but i was i was
always in manufacturing
okay so i'm a lot more familiar with
with data science
in in manufacturing um i don't know
necessarily
how it can be used in in design per se
but but the key
that's that's where you come in that's
that's what you got to figure out you
got to figure out
where chemical and or sorry where data
science fits in
in design so let me show you
let me show you what what i would do if
i was you and i mean you probably know
this better than i do but
but i'll this is what i would do if if i
was you i would go over here
and i would type data science in let's
see
um i mean engineering design maybe
oh i felt design wrong and i i would see
i would look for a towards data science
article towards data science is my go-to
have you ever heard of that before
oh yes i have yeah okay i live
on on towards data science so
i mean does it oh right here data
science and the design
process in the design process oh let's
see that
this might be interesting this might be
like more of like
using it for with something that's
called design of experiments
let's see what it what it kind of says
so design experiments is kind of
interesting because you're trying to
decide
what you might want to test that might
be that actually might be something that
you do
in your role is is decide like you come
up with experiments
for to test like the integrity of
something or actually another one that i
did when i was
uh a chemical engineer
was um have you ever heard
of like uh it's something called an
in-strawn i think
yes okay an instron for those who don't
know they like pull stuff apart right
yeah or like or it like smashes stuff
it's like it's testing physical
properties
of different materials um and so one
time we had like
five different plastics and we wanted to
be able to decide what plastic was like
the strongest
basically and so we did a bunch of tests
on the instron
and then we had all this data from the
instron and we needed to decide
you know which plastic was the best
that's actually a data science problem i
mean that's that's really
a stats problem that you're trying to
solve um so
that would be a good example of where
like i don't know if that's design per
se maybe that's like more like quality
assurance or
or testing or something like that but
that would be like a great place to use
data
science i guess i guess in your line of
work right now
like do you see data on a day-to-day
basis are there like data
sets better yeah like this for me yeah
there's a bunch of data but i pretty
much use jump
to solve most of them you use jump
yeah i'm quite spoiled by jump i love
jump yeah that's why i don't learn any
coding software so it's so hard for me
to learn r or python because jump has
spoiled me a lot
do you do you know jsl no i don't know
what js
oh that's the jump scripting language it
sucks don't learn it it's awful
but but it's like like if you like if
you look at graph builder and jump you
can like
look at the actual code that they use to
make graph builder
but it's not very good i wouldn't i
wouldn't recommend doing it okay so you
use
jump what for those who don't know jump
is a
stat software tool from sas and it's
awesome we actually used it a lot at
exxon mobil
um i really i really like it so i guess
what platforms do you use and jump the
most often
um i use the doe the graph builders okay
more visualizations yeah okay do we
graph builder's an awesome graph builder
is like one of the best tools i've ever
seen in
all data science like platforms it's so
simple and so nice
um okay yeah i figured doe is probably
important for you
i unfortunately i don't know a lot about
doe um
but i mean basically in engineering
there's a decent amount of room for data
science whenever there's data there's
room for data science
and so does definitely one you can
become like the doe guy you get really
good at doe
um that's definitely a way that that
could be like a sidestepping job
um but you could you could get really
good at like
quality and like doing things like anova
have you ever done a nova testing
yeah yes okay that could be like another
thing for you
um moving like let's say like you're not
in this design role anymore there's a
lot of room in manufacturing
like actually looking at like fault
detection that might be actually another
thing from design i don't actually know
but like looking at when something
breaks why did it break
predictive maintenance is another big
one and then
the last one i would say is tying
economics to
engineering so like i mean
you probably don't work at a
manufacturing facility but that
manufacturing facility is trying to like
put out a certain amount of units you
have to like figure out the supply chain
of like getting
bringing in the you know your components
to make other components to make your
products to ship out
you can make that an optimization supply
chain problem that also could be solved
using data science and
and uh your engineering know-how um so
those are kind of some of the
the areas does that answer your question
or did i just talk in circles
i probably just don't know yeah it did
answer but one of the questions i have
is like
um since we both are not from computer
science background
um how do you learn a python or any
coding like did you have a difficulty
because
you just came naturally um let me ask
you this did you learn any programming
as like an undergrad
yeah i have some c plus plus background
yeah that's the thing mechanical
engineering does c plus plus for some
reason
i feel like a majority of the time which
is which is probably good so you guys
can write robot software i think
um in automation software in chemical
engineering
and a lot of other engineering we learn
matlab which is which is pretty similar
to python so the translation from matlab
to python
isn't that hard and you guys do like
more robotics coding i feel like and in
other engineering we do more like
scientific computing
which is more close closely related to
data science um
so i didn't think i had i mean i'm
definitely not as good at programming as
someone who studies computer science
um but i think i think the key is just
doing it
you just practice you just do it as much
as you can and it's hard because
you're not doing it probably in your day
to day at work right
i mean you could actually if you really
wanted to
you could start doing what you do in
jump in python
it would take you longer but it would
help you learn
um so i mean that's and it's free i mean
i'm sure
you guys already paid for your licenses
but i mean it's free and jump is
expensive
so that's an option is to do it there or
the other option is you know spending
time doing it in school
or on your own and you just you just
gotta learn it i mean that's
just gotta do it so i would do it on
things
that benefit you in more ways than one
instead of doing stupid exercises
like prince hello worlds two plus two's
four
you know i would do it on things that
you find either one
interesting or too beneficial so
the interesting would be like you love
like what's your hobby
like what do you like to do um i like to
learn
okay do you use strava no
how do you track your runs or you just
love running and you just you just do it
for like the endorphins
yeah i just go along with the laps
that's it
okay well next time i want you to bring
your phone and i want you to record the
run
okay record the run somehow if you have
like a smart watch or you could just
have a phone
download strava it's free just do this
once okay just do it once
okay um record your run and you're gonna
have like
it'll record like your geo location over
time
and you can like plot that on a map and
maybe it will record your speed per time
and you can make a graph to like show
like what was your top speed like
when you were here like what was your
speed here and i don't know that's kind
of fun because it's like your own data
it's kind of interesting
uh okay the other way you could do it is
like do something that's going to
uh make you money and so one way
that you can do this is you can take my
free course on predicting the stock
market with python
it's like it's go it's okay it's a free
course
it's a couple hours long it doesn't show
you how to do everything
but like you can get the basics
of python from it and i mean i'm not
you're not going to make millions of
dollars
but like it could help you understand
stocks better basically and help you
you know integrate like investments and
and data science so that
that that's another way is to do
something that's like beneficial to you
because it's fun or because it's going
to make you money and so that way you're
learning but you're also getting a
second benefit
i mean the coding comes down to
repetition just do as much as you can
that's really it okay yeah that was
pretty much the
questions i had uh and one last question
like
what kind of software used for data
visualization as you know instagram it's
pretty cool
so okay yeah um
the software i i use i use python for a
lot of my visualizations
a lot of the stuff that i i have put on
my instagram previously
i did i need to clarify i didn't make
all of them i made like
a tenth of them and then the rest of
them i'm sharing so a lot of them made
their stuff in tableau
tableau is very powerful very popular i
like python
and if i'm not using python i'm using a
um
a free software called flourish
it's like drag and drop kind of like
graph builder and jump
um so that's probably the other one that
i use i have used power bi too but i'm
not a huge fan
i use python a lot of the time for for
my visualizations
okay yeah that's it those are the
questions from my side
thank you yeah i appreciate your time
man and we'll talk soon have a good
night yeah sure
bye-bye yep okay so our
hour is up so thank you guys for being
on this ask avery show i'm gonna take
these last questions really fast
um yes i will share the link of my stock
course
i'll do i'll just reply to your comment
right after this really fast
um so yeah what is what is the stock
course and the link
stock course is going to be pre-recorded
it is releasing tomorrow
so it's you can just take it whenever
you want at your own pace
um i want to get to these questions
really fast
super general but was wondering if you
had any pet peeves within data science
or maybe even data science analytics
hiring process
hiring process okay here's a pet peeve
it is like beginner
there's no such thing as a beginner data
science position it's like
beginner position and it's like three
years required it's like well how am i
supposed to three years required when i
don't have a beginner position
and it's like you can't get a job
because you don't have the experience
but you don't have experience because
you can't get a job
that's annoying and so there's ways to
break it doing personal projects working
for
a smaller company working for an uh for
free
doing stuff for a uh non-profit there's
ways around it but i really don't like
that process too much
oh and look at that leads right into
ola's question how do you get that first
data science job without any robust
experience
in the online job requirement the answer
is personal projects you need to do
personal projects relating to that field
you have to spend 10 hours on your own
time trying to solve a similar problem
that that company is experiencing
and do it on your own time post it on
linkedin post it on your blog post it on
github
and then apply and say hey look i've
already i've already done something very
similar
to this please please look at my resume
that is the best way or work for free to
have experience i worked for free
for three months um it was only part
time so i was lucky
i owe everything in my life to those
three months i owe everything to it i
cold emailed
a bunch of people and i worked for free
for three months someone took a chance
on me
and like i can trace everything that's
good in my life from
those three months so all right last
question
how to make career and data science from
non-math background other fields
uh you gotta learn your stuff so whether
you're going to learn via courses via
education master's degree you got to
learn first and then you got to practice
do as much as you can
spend a lot of time doing personal
projects
and you're only going to make it in data
science from you know a different
field if you really have the passion for
it and you're willing to put in the work
but it's totally worth it it's really
fun it's very fulfilling career
i've loved it it's been it's been
awesome so do projects
learn as much as you can um thanks for
joining in tonight guys
really appreciate y'all um i'll throw
the link to the stocks course right now
in the comments so just be on the
lookout for that um
and yeah we'll catch you guys later on
next time on the ask avery show thanks
for the people that
came in i really appreciate it hope you
guys have a good night bye

Title: I Studied 365 Data Visualizations in 2020

Description: Come hear about some of the things I've learned about data visualization over the past year! I'll be talking about my favorite viz, different techniques, and the best places to learn.

On January 1, 2020 I created the Instagram account @VeryData_365. ‚ÄúVery‚Äù because my name is Avery (and I like to toy with the fact that ‚Äúvery‚Äù is in my name) and ‚ÄúData‚Äù because I love data; I‚Äôd say I‚Äôm obsessed. The ‚Äú365‚Äù tried to capture the idea I would study/post one data visualization every day of 2020.

Video Transcript:
hello
everyone hello hello it is
seven o'clock central time so that must
mean it's time
to go live and time to talk about data
visualization i hope you all
are doing exquisitely well
um we're going to give it a couple
seconds for some people to hop on
so if you're on i'm streaming to
linkedin
and i'm streaming to um where else am i
streaming i'm streaming on
youtube as well so hopefully i'll see
you guys
there soon um i'm really excited to be
talking
to you about this i've been like waiting
all week for
so i'm very excited to to be talking
about it
i'm just getting some stuff pulled up
here uh making sure that we're all ready
to go and making sure that i can
i can see your guys's comments so if
you're on and you're watching right now
go ahead and post in the chat um
tell me where you're from where you're
listening from and maybe what time it is
so um i can start i can't i can't post
comments but i can talk so
um i am in houston texas right now and
it is 702
and yeah excited to get going um all
right
we got uh samya happy to be here
samya i'm happy you're here too thanks
for uh being on
um if you guys have any issues if you
guys can't hear me or if my audio's too
soft
once again throw it in the comments so i
can check it out
um let me see here all right perfect um
nice we got derrick in h town what's up
derek
we got bridger in houston also in
houston hey bridger how you doing
we got a ish hey avery hey he helped me
guys with this project i'll talk about
him a little bit and how he helped me
we got michael he's in age town we got
tenku morning from singapore 9 a.m that
is crazy from the other side of the
world
thanks for making time to hop on uh
uh tenku we got davondra
from toronto canada 803.
love canada that's sweet we got janelle
from michigan
currently 8 pm hey michigan ain't bad i
like
michigan we got daniel hey daniel good
to see you again
glad you can make it and we got ethan
looks like hey yo i think ethan's in
rexburg
so awesome super stoked to be started
if you guys are just hopping on go ahead
and throw it in the chat where you're
from
uh what time it is love to put your
little comment up here in the top left
corner
we got sis from indonesia we got
uh renat from philadelphia okay
with that i'm gonna go ahead and get
started so
i'm really excited to be talking today
i'm gonna be talking a little bit about
data visualization and specifically my
last year
studying data visualization because i
spent
all of 2020 really focusing on data
visualization
so if you've never heard of data
visualization before what it is
is basically displaying data visually
for the eye to capture
so data is often like in table form and
that's sometimes hard
for a human to understand but if you put
data
in a table or sorry a graph
or a chart it becomes easier for humans
to digest and you can do that in a
really creative way
that makes it really beautiful and makes
it easy for people to understand your
points
and so i set out in 2020 to study data
visualization
from scratch um
by just studying one day to visit day so
every day i would find a random data
visualization from the web
and i would study it i'd look at it i
tried to understand what story i was
trying to
tell i tried to understand what
techniques it used
in the graph and then i would post it to
my instagram um so if you haven't
checked out my instagram
let me make a quick little banner for
that so you guys can see that
but my instagram is uh very data
underscore 365. if you guys have don't
follow me on instagram
go ahead and check that real fast um
i'll show that right there
all right go follow me on instagram that
is my instagram bio
um and i'd love to follow you back if i
remember
i'm getting a lot of followers right now
so it's a little bit hard
we got uh jared from linden naruel here
from malaysia
um so okay so that was that was my quest
so i started posting on my instagram
every single day so i'm actually i'll
just show you my instagram
i'm gonna add my um let's see
i'm gonna add my um
screen here so you can see me talking
over here on this side
all right so here is my instagram so
once again
my instagram handle is at varidata365
and i'm going to be showing you my
instagram so here's kind of the end
this is actually the last vis i posted
of
2020 but i have different topics on this
instagram let me see if i can blow this
up a little bit bigger
so you don't have to squint as much
all right so i had different themes so
this was the best data viz of
2020 not 2021. i got i got a little
excited so
i went ahead and put 2021 the week
before that i was looking at a python
data visualization library tool called
alt air
that helps you make data visualizations
before that i was looking at a resource
called flowingdata.com
and before that i was looking at an
awesome place called r data is beautiful
so this is my instagram if you go on
here i have
uh let's see 395 posts so that's about
365
actual ones about data and then some
extra ones just talking about themes you
can kind of see it visually
split on my instagram but this was an
awesome project for me and i learned a
ton
and so actually talking about my
what i learned i created this article so
it's published in towards data science
if you guys haven't ever checked out
towards data science i highly recommend
it
because it's like a great resource for
all things
data science so if you're in the data
world at all i highly recommend going on
to towards data science now and again
to read some articles because there's a
lot of really good articles
that talk about how to do data vis how
to do data science how to do machine
learning
how to just deal with data so this is
this is the uh my
publication um it's called i studied 365
data visualizations in 2020.
a crazy instagram dataviz experiment
um so this is just highlighting what i
learned um over the
the year the lessons i learned um but
the whole reason this happened was
actually because of linkedin it's
because of you guys
um so i really appreciate you guys um
i applied to a pretty big um conference
so
the conference is called let me pull up
here outlier
and beta viz society
i applied to be a speaker at this
conference that's coming up in
um in just a couple weeks i think it's
called outlier
and it's from the dataviz society so i
applied to speak there
and um i wanted to talk about all the
things i learned in 2020
from this data visualization journey i
was on
right so i applied i wrote up an
abstract i showed them my instagram
and i said hey like i would love to talk
about this please let me know
if i can talk about this i would really
love to
i think i have some interesting things
to talk about and
yeah please let me speak and so i waited
months
in anticipation of hearing back from
this conference to whether i got
accepted
or to speak you know and so i'm pulling
up my linkedin post here sorry my
computer's being slow
so on about a week ago i got this i got
this uh
this email saying hi there
first of all thank you so much for
taking the time to submit a talk to
outlier
we regret to inform you that your
proposal has not been accepted
we've received over 300 proposals to
outlier which makes we're tremendously
happy about
makes it very hard to choose the talks
so
blah blah blah i got rejected from to
speak at this conference
and i was really bummed and so i wrote a
linkedin post about this actually
and i said another thing i got rejected
from um and i was pretty bummed about it
but
uh i posted on linkedin and i was like
i'm gonna try to be really positive
because i know that i made something
that's really cool
and that's really positive and that's
really interesting i think
and even though they were interested in
it um i
i want to see who's interested in it so
i said i'm going to post the
presentation
and who wants to read it and you know
this got viewed over 21 000 times
it got 177 uh likes
and 74 comments and everyone was so nice
thank you so much the linkedin community
everyone was super kind to me and
they're like yeah post it post it
um please post it and so i was like yes
people are interested i want to talk
about it um so
then i that was such a cool story about
linkedin i wanted to
share with others about the success so
then i i made this post
kind of telling my story of hey i was
rejected and then two days ago i posted
on linkedin
and everyone was super nice to me and
really encouraged me and that's the
power of linkedin
you guys should post on linkedin it's
such a great community and great
following
um and so i made i made this kind of
promo and i
announced that i'd be doing an article
release yesterday which the article came
out
once again it's called i study 365
data visualizations in 2020 and this
post kind of blew up this got seen by
almost 65
000 people uh 964
likes and 133 comments and everyone was
so supportive saying that they were
gonna
you know come to this talk or read the
article and so anyways thank you once
again i'm so
like amazed and taken back by the
support this has received
um so then let's see then the
article came out uh yesterday right
and then we're in the live stream today
and this is the uh
live stream going on here so um
anyway so that's kind of the story of
why i'm sharing this
i'm super excited to be sharing it and
the lessons i learned
um so with that um while i'm going to
be talking about i'm going to start with
just the article i wrote you can check
it out on medium
you should go to my posts on linkedin
and find the link um the links right
here
in the first comment of this post and
um but while i'm doing that if you've
already read the article just
go ahead and comment below hey i read
the article and i just want to see who's
read it
um over 10 000 people have read the
article so far which i'm blown
away uh by but if you're one of the 10
000 people who have read the article
just say i've read it in the in the
comments while i'm pulling this up
so here's what i learned okay
so the first thing i learned was i
learned a lot about new techniques
and charts so a lot if you've never
heard about data visualization you've
definitely seen like a light a line
chart
or a bar chart those are pretty simple
data or pie chart maybe that's like
a pretty simple data visualization that
you've probably seen before and you just
thought it was a chart
that's portraying data right but there's
actually like more
innovative and creative ways to show
data than just a bar chart or a pie
chart
you can be really creative and come up
with very unique ways and so one of the
unique ways that i saw
from doing my study
last year was how powerful words can be
so words we usually see words right
humans see
words or i'm sorry we usually read words
humans read words
but sometimes we can see them um so
um in a couple different things that the
new york times did this year
they talked about seeing words so right
here we have a new york times article
called it's actually the front page and
it says
us deaths near a hundred thousand an
uncalculable loss and this is the front
page of the new york times
and each one of these i mean you can
barely see it but each one of these
um little tiny tiny pieces of text
is a name of someone who passed away due
to covet 19. oh let me blow that up for
you sorry
there we go um and so you could see the
impact that coveted 19s had
instead of just looking at a chart wow
each one of these people was a person
they had lives they had families
and they're no longer with us and you
see the whole front page of the
newspaper
just full of names and these people had
lives
and that was such a big impact to me and
obviously sadly tragically
we're much the u.s is much further than
a hundred thousand deaths now
so that's a little bit older but this is
the power that a data visualization can
have is you can display it with words
all right the next one is actually
really interesting
also from the new york times i really
like the new york times because they do
a fantastic job
of showing um data
they're just really good at putting data
in really interesting ways
so i don't know how many of you guys
subscribe to new york times but if you
go to
if you just google new york times
graphics you can get really good
data visualization and really understand
what's going on
so this one right here is very
interesting once again you see words
and i understand that it's maybe small
on your screen
you can see a bunch of words and
paragraphs that are stacked
in columns going across to the right
this actually represents these are the
words that trump spoke
at his rally and the new york times did
fact checks
on what he said at his rallies and they
highlighted
and read the what they deem to be lies
that trump said so you you could just
have a data or a pie chart and show
you know 33 of what trump said was a lie
according to the new york times
but what they did is we made it really
interesting and really uh
like intriguing for you to look at and
be like wow there's a lot of red like
check out this whole paragraph
um kind of in the middle of this page
there's like
just red on red on red and you know he
lied so many times
um and it's i mean it's just really good
at portraying
what's going on with the trump rallies
so this is that's a really elegant way
of showing data vis um i also want this
to be really interactive
so if you guys have uh any questions
that you want to ask
go ahead and throw them in the comments
and i'll see them and i'll take them as
we go
so if you have like any questions about
uh like what inspired me to do this or
why i did it
let me talk about those if you have any
questions about the graphs in particular
we can talk about those
um kind of a free-for-all feel free to
ask me whatever
um and we'll stop and i'll throw your
question up in a comment
um okay so the next one is really cool
this is a different type of data vis
that i see becoming more and more
popular
especially with computer technology i'm
getting bigger and bigger
this is also from the new york times and
i call it scrollable data stories
so sometimes like data vis or graphs
they're static
you know there's not much going on
that's just like a picture it's just a
bar chart
it's just a pie chart it's just a line
chart and you kind of see it and you're
like you digest it
um you can have animations or movies and
those are more exciting
um but this new thing that i've been
seeing is scrollable data stories
and these are very interactive and fun
um so
i'm gonna go ahead and show you this one
and uh
this one's called how the virus won a
lot of good
um data visualization was themed on
kovit this year
obviously um obviously like that was a
big part of this year
and uh it's you know a lot of it's all
about numbers you know how many people
have come
covet how many people have died from
covid and you know it's hard to
like actually understand what the
numbers are and so if you can use data
visualization to digest some of those
numbers
um it can be really powerful okay let's
see if this will load
my internet has been so slow recently
i'm gonna let that uh
load and then we'll come back to it it's
actually pretty computational heavy
because it's pretty sweet
um what they're doing um
so we'll let that load we'll move on to
the next one which i'm actually really
excited about and it's
augmented reality data vis we might have
to let that one
load too because that's a video from
tick tock
i realized recently that i need to start
paying for the the better internet
um i i don't pay for the very good
internet
this is from a guy named michael d
benigno
i'm sure i said that right um he's the
head of business
at flow immersion immersive which is
this company
that i think makes this product you can
kind of see their logo in the top left
corner of this tick tock
um but this is like a new way to to see
data visualization in augmented reality
so like where the
where the data is actually shown like in
real life
um so he's showing his uh tick tock
followers
in this tick tock video we'll see if
this pulls up
um loading
all right there we go
do you see each one of these dots is one
of his followers
and then watch them come to this line
chart
where he has the x-axis being the date
and then the y-axis being followers
and you can show how many came on each
day
and it's color coded to show how many
followers he has
so i think he has five fifty thousand
now but you can
see like kind of the data flowing in the
actual picture of him
kind of explaining it so that's that's
pretty interesting um i've really seen a
lot of
uh not a lot but a lot from him
on tick-tock of this new technology all
right let's see if how the virus is
loaded
like i said very computational heavy um
doesn't look good all right going back
to the article okay
one thing i did in 2020 was i um
came up with my own uh type of data
visualization
um so this is this is my very own this
is my own work um
original idea i'm really proud of it and
it's something that
i was really excited about when it
happened
and it's called twitter portraits so
you've all heard the phrase
that a picture is worth
a thousand words right that's what they
say so i was thinking well what if a
picture was made up of a thousand words
how many words would that be worth and
so what i did is i basically
was like okay i want to paint someone's
picture with the words they say
and i thought oh twitter is pretty much
what what people say so i'm gonna take
someone's tweets
download them scrape them all and i'm
gonna turn that into
a portrait of what they look like where
the biggest word
is how often is the most frequent word
they used
and then the smallest word is the word
they use the least so that's that's
called
that's a form of nlp which is natural
language processing it's very simple
a very simple form of it um but i was i
was pretty excited about this to
to come up with this idea so here's my
twitter portrait from
uh my high school twitter let me pull
that off so you can see it better so
this is my
my twitter handle in high school i think
my new one is
at avery data this is my
high school twitter and this is a
portrait of me and
each one of you can't if you squint you
know you can kind of see
that there's different words inside of
this portrait that is actually doing the
color
colorization so at the top here you see
like my handle at avery smith 007
i use that a lot probably because i
refer to myself or people refer to me
and i retweet them
um i see the word day on the right hand
side i see soccer on the left hand side
i see my high school name i see love
in the middle i see girl and school on
the right
so this this portrait is supposed to
portray me and what i cared about
when i was on twitter and i did some
other people as well so here is our
soon-to-be
former president at real donald trump
you see the word great in the top
left-hand corner you see the word trump
see the word job in the bottom you see
real donald trump
at the bottom total endorsement case
probably for coronavirus
fox news in one of his eyes and this is
what i call
uh a twitter portrait of trump
um
yeah so then let's look at the the other
one and these are just my favorite nba
players
um thanks derek i just saw your message
here
once i did better internet i'll let you
know uh it's kind of a mess right now
um but here is my favorite nba players
you have lebron james giannis on tecumpo
kyrie irving james harden who just got
traded yesterday
heard some news on that but uh you can
see what they talk about lebron says
love and man
a lot and james harden says congrats
uh kyrie irving says vote and good
so yep those are the nba players i was
really proud of this data visualization
um it's really easy now i can just like
type in well
twitter's kind of made it harder twitter
doesn't like me scraping all their data
so they try to keep me out
but twitter's a great resource to get
dataviz
okay perfect so i think now let's see
did this load okay this loaded
all right it's gonna be a little choppy
for you guys okay but hopefully right
now you can kind of see these red dots
moving a little bit
and it's a state of united states or
it's a it's a graph of the united states
you're gonna see blue lines which
represent uh people traveling basically
from state to state and red indicates
that it's a case of covid and so what i
do with this
is i scroll down and you see that the
column on the right hand side
is going to tell the story so this first
story is it started small
a man near seattle had a persistent
cough a woman in chicago had a fever and
shortness of breath
so these are the first two cases seattle
and chicago
then you scroll more and the story
evolves by mid-february there are only
15 known coveted cases so there's the 15
known coveted cases
all with direct links back to china
president trump didn't really care
here are the 15 different plots
on the left hand side it has the graph
all separate um
there was already 2 000 infections that
were hidden and spread in through
the cities so you'll see that those are
the 2000 hidden in
in infections and so you see the story
that it's telling
with text and with the picture and as
you scroll down
you kind of go at your own pace here we
trace the spread
um and so now it's going to change the
graph here a little choppy
how the virus got in so this is showing
and you can see why this is so
computational heavy you got a lot of
graphs going on that are changing really
often
um so look at this data is now flowing
if you can't tell
it's moving um i understand that with my
crappy internet and the nature of how
big this data is this might be hard to
see
let me see if i can find one more that i
like so i just scrolled down a little
bit
and now now you can kind of see it
exploding out of new york
those data points are moving from new
york to other places
anyways if you haven't seen it i would
really highly recommend it um you should
check out
the the resource the link on your own
computer when you're not streaming and
not with crappy internet
um it's called how the virus won by the
new york times
okay i'll move to my next point which
i'm i'm excited about if you care about
dataviz
and you want to learn more this might be
a great place to be is the
great resources to study so i studied
um i took i visited these websites often
i already talked about towards data
science which is where i ended up
publishing
this article um that will show you
tutorials about how to make data vis in
a programmatic way
um flowing data is a great place where
you can like
see all the best examples on the
internet the subreddit
our data is beautiful is incredible and
there's like really awesome
data stories that are told there and
that are like from the people it's
really interesting very like
open source and organic i really like it
nightingale is a publication that the
database society makes
where it's a little bit more in depth if
you like infographics and you're into
graphic design cool infographics.com is
like a really good resource to check out
and i know alan earlier was on here and
said that
he was learning tableau um one of the
best ways to like learn what tableau's
capabilities are
is actually on the tableau public
gallery down here
uh which is like a great place to go
look at tableau and understand what it
can do
some of the best people at dataviz in
the world are the new york times graphic
team which i already talked about
recently
um they're uh they're really good
like very skilled the best in the world
at making data vis
in my opinion um information is
beautiful
that's another guy he makes really
awesome data vis
he's really good knows what he's doing
charter is this really cool company that
shows like relatable data vis
once a week where it's like very
interesting stories
the financial times and 538 are two
other publications
that i really like um that are super
good
uh at doing data vis
okay another thing that i discovered was
data art
so usually think about data as like a
very technical term right
it's like hardcore it's like numbers
like you're the number guy if you know
how to do
data right but actually it can be very
beautiful and it can be very artistic
and creative
and so one of my coolest things that i
found this year is called stocks
art and it's actually this is an this is
an image
of stocks art and uh
it's very very creative um
it's kind of hard to notice but if you
look
at this skyline right here you'll notice
that
it kind of has like some weird jagged
like it's like this mountainous thing
you know this red mountainous thing and
you're like what is that
um let me zoom back in on that sorry
take this off
um that's actually the stock price of
tesla so in the upper left-hand corner
here it says tesla
so this is the stock price of tesla that
was the dip and then this is the
absolute rocket that it's gone through
recently and like the cityscape right
here
um these are like the the gains and the
drawdowns or something like that i don't
know stocks
all that well so i can't really remember
what what the what the cityscape
represents
but it's pretty cool that this like this
landscape is actually data it was
generated by data
so you guys should definitely check out
stocks are it's very cool
that they take like a a data you know
graph and make it into art and they have
these for sale
um that i mean i want to buy one to be
honest um
okay here's an interesting one from a
fellow instagramer
uh nick rogo and
this looks like abstract art kind of
right this is actually
and i don't fully remember how it works
but um
yeah it is cool derek it is super cool i
love data art
um this right here like looks super
abstract this is actually one of uh
box masterpieces he took like all the
notes
and like the frequency of the note and
what note it was
and that's where you get this this
really pretty graph so it's really cool
that he took like
you know math it's music right but he
turned it into something you can
visualize so you don't like hear
box masterpiece but you like see it
visually
and like digest it that way i think
that's that's very neat
um so that's one of the things i learned
in 2020s is
data art um and i actually had the
chance to even make my own
this is my own abstract piece here um
and what this is i mean it looks kind of
crazy huh
um this is actually the if you took
i love basketball i love the nba and so
this graph is if you took an nba player
and you said hey before you play i'm
going to have you step in this
ink so i can track every single
footprint you take as a player
this is what it would look like so i
have two players i have hassan y side
and kristoff's porzingis one is red and
one is blue
and this is showing if they basically
stepped and ink the whole game
what it would look like at the end of of
the the game if they stepped in paint
one blue one red this is what it would
look like um and so this is
my own original piece um i really like
it i think it's
it's like if you get like a really cool
player like on a really cool game
um i think this is a really cool piece
of memorabilia
um that i really enjoy i enjoyed making
too
okay um i'm gonna skip the
the tufty section here if you've never
heard of edward tufte he is the data
visualization
king he's very good at data
visualization
and he has some awesome books explaining
the process um
i definitely highly recommend learning
about that two of my favorite things are
sparklines which is these like
small little charts right here that
don't really have any
like thing other than the data um
roshan khan who i had on the other day
kind of made a similar thing where it's
like small repeated
um very like minimal graphs that i think
look really good
this is for search terms in 2020 so the
higher the peak the more it was googled
so kobe bryant was heavily googled in
february and joe biden was heavily
googled
in november tick tock heavily googled
throughout the year
unemployment kind of zoomed up once
coronavirus broke out
and you can see chronoviruses uh peak
there as well
um going back to that last one derek
asked a question
where did you get the data for the
footprints on that one that's a really
good question derek
um through a very very difficult place
um the nba actually has like 18 cameras
in every single arena that tracks
every single thing that's going on um so
they have all this data the nba does
but it's hard to get it um i have the
exact data source that i got it
but the last time i checked it got taken
down so i don't think it's really
possible to get any more
but i'm going to check again recently or
soon just to make sure
um i'm going to check on that i don't
know if it got taken down or not
oh yeah roshan booyah shout out yep
rashaan's graph there
already talked about it and i said i was
going to skip this but i'm going through
it anyway so
another thing i learned with small
multiples this is another thing that
tufte teaches
and that is the idea that graphs are
often
more interesting when combined with
other graphs that makes it easy to
compare
so here's one from owen phillips who's
an nba
stats graph guy i really like to follow
let me get
um yeah and he has a you know every
single nba team here is a little box
and their most 25 common shots is
represented by a little hexagon
so the atlanta hawks like to shoot it
from this corner in this corner
you know the left corner and the right
corner a lot in the paint and a lot of
the top of the key
and so a lot of them kind of look
similar because that's how the nba looks
now
but like for instance let me find one
that looks a little bit different
i'm looking for the let's see
okay the spurs for instance the spurs
are in that
bottom third in from the left and they
can have
these two pointers they like to take at
the top of the key that's like a spurs
thing they really like that that range
so
you can like combine multiple graphs
together and get a better picture
this one's from a graphic designer from
i think germany's
and her name's clara we're friends on
instagram i met her on instagram
and each one of these is a person that
she saw on the subway in germany
and each one of these uh like that you
see that there's a mouth
there's an eye there's a nose
and each one of those represents how was
um how each person in the subway was
wearing their mask if they
first off that they were wearing the
mask i think that
well if they weren't wearing a mask
that's a mouth because you could see
their mouth
if if they were wearing a mask but you
could they had like their nose they
didn't have it like covered their nose
right the proper way then she'd show
with a nose
if you could only see their eyes that
was an eye so she was basically showing
the percentage of people wearing their
mask correctly
but she did like a really fun abstract
art way so i think it's very enjoyable
i'm gonna skip the turtles for now um i
met some really cool people
um i really like kyle pastor his name is
uh datastuffplus on instagram and i
really enjoy
his instagram very good has lots of
interesting
uh stuff that he posts from other people
he really helps a lot of people on
instagram
next one's aaron penn he makes
generative art so it's like uh
it's like abstract art that's made
strictly from like programming it
doesn't necessarily have anything to do
with data but it's like
really cool i just bought a piece um
actually here give me a second let me
show you
let me show you the piece i bought
i haven't had the chance to frame it yet
um i don't know how well you're going to
be able to see it let's see
that is the piece i just bought from
aaron penn i think it's really cool lots
of cool colors lots of cool designs
i'm gonna throw a frame around that all
of his uh proceeds are going to charity
so that that was like 45 bucks and i
wanted to support him and i wanted to
support charity so i bought it
um the next one is as kate strachney um
she
is like if you haven't seen her on
linkedin and you care about data
definitely give her a follow she has a
conference coming up and i think like
two weeks called dedicated
definitely sign up for that highly
recommend
her and uh yeah her conference as well
and then i got into books i got into a
lot of data
visualization books so if you have a
chance and you want to
you know read about data visualization
definitely check out my recommendations
here
i won't go into each one of them um but
i kind of get a description
in the article so if you want if you
want a book about data visualization i
recommend
some of these um let's see
the one that i would recommend the most
if you're getting started
is actually storytelling with data
that's like how to
and like it kind of explains a bunch of
stuff it's kind of a really good
introduction book
and i'm actually here let me grab it i
have mine right here
on my bookshelf so i'm actually
um here's the book that i recommend
storytelling with data
it's by cole naflex she used to work for
google so here's my copy
actually right here um
so i have like here's like i have like a
bunch of notes written in these things
man like i marked these all
up all over the place so here's my copy
and i'm actually going to be doing a
giveaway i want to give this one away
because i have a second copy
totally brand new haven't written
anything in it unused
i already have my copy so now i want to
give away this copy
so oh wait you guys couldn't see i was
i'm so sorry that is so funny
all right here's my copy i want to give
away
this copy right here um yeah i'm sorry
um let me show you the uh the abstract
art that's the abstract art there
um super embarrassing that i just did
that but you know what you live and you
learn
so anyways i want to do a giveaway for
that uh
that book i want to give it away to one
of you guys um
i don't know what i'm going to do the
giveaway yet it's but it's going to
happen soon
so be on the lookout for my instagram or
on maybe maybe my instagram but probably
on my linkedin is where i'll be
uh giving that one away um okay
now let's go back to this
um all right so check out the books in
the article if you haven't seen it yet
the last thing is i did some i did some
hot takes
um some rapid fire stuff here um some
really cool links
here i talked about um you know what
role data visualization played in covit
19
especially this john hopkins dashboard i
mean i think this is going to go in the
history books as one of the
like the biggest times that data
visualization's ever been used
is for the john hopkins dashboard um i
mean i don't know about you guys but i
was especially when covet started
i was checking this thing every day you
know seeing
you know who has what states have
covered what countries have coveted
um trying to understand what was going
on with like
the world um and try to keep track of it
all
so um it's still loading hopefully
you've seen this before
if not just google john hopkins uh covet
dashboard
it looks it looks like um
i know i have a picture on my instagram
it looks very similar to this
um right here has a graph
total cases some other graphs see if it
loaded nope
okay um i had a hot take that i actually
think
that the best data visualization
visualization of all time maybe is a
pokemon card
if you if you ever like had pokemon
cards say
i love pokemon in the comments or
something like that i want to see you
i like pokemon and i think the best data
visualization okay maybe not the best
ever
one of the best is a pokemon card
um i talked about some bad data
visualization i talked about how people
love maps
people love um animations if you haven't
seen
um this visualization of
what everyone in each state googled um
every uh every month on reddit let me
see if this one will pop up
once again i have bad internet so we'll
see if it loads
nice pokemon go derek's like i played
pokemon go
um anyway so while that's loading
um that's that's what i learned um i'm
actually really proud of this
of this uh image right here so this is
this is like not a stock image this is
this is my image
um and it's actually all 300
and what was it 95 different posts
that i i put up on my instagram last
year
um so i used a tool i had to download
them all i had to go instagram and ask
for my data
download all of the pictures for every
single post that i had
and then i put them in something called
an image quilt which is from
edward tufte um i can talk about that if
my internet ever works
but this is called an image quilt um
and it's i think it turned out really
cool
um it just looks like you can see like a
lot of database going on
okay let's see if this video will play
then i saw a fun comment from aryan
about the hardin trade
that i'll talk about okay so this graph
let me see if i can make this big can i
make this big
hole if you guys haven't seen this or if
it's choppy
you need to go check it out on your own
page
um this is showing every single day what
the most popular search term was
on google from 2019 or 2018
to sometime in 2020. so you can see a
lot of 2018
fortnight was really prevalent all over
united states everyone loved
fortnite um you saw some flashes okay
logan paul something must happen in the
news with logan paul
okay mac miller okay now back to
fortnite baby shark baby sharks going on
bill cosby okay baby sharks going on
okay
uh the haunting of hill house must have
just come out baby shark red dead to the
red dead redemption 2 stan lee back to
baby shark
back to fortnite this tells like such a
fun story
of like what's happening in america um
you know you're seeing the battle of
baby shark versus fortnite
r kelly seven rings must have just come
out by ariana grande
okay now we're in billy eiler eilish
must have an album uh now in 2019
jessie smallett gets uh like attacked or
whatever captain marvel must have come
out in movie theaters
billy eilish releases an album nipsey
hustle dies
old town road comes out you can kind of
see this is the story of america oh
there's avengers okay there's game of
thrones
old town rhodes coming out the song okay
chernobyl
is you know you can watch that billy
eilish back okay toy story 4 comes out
billy eilish stranger things um
okay billy eilish el paso shooting in
texas and new mexico that's like a very
like
um like local thing right kevin hart
iphone 11 comes out area 51 do you guys
remember
that that was crazy joker comes out so
you can kind of see the story
that this data vis is telling it's like
the history of the united states
in like a really fun interactive way
that you guys can relate baby yoda is a
thing
mandalorian everyone's trying to find
mandalorian prince harry
it must be when they moved the
impeachment in january
jojo rabbit comes out weekend releases
an album
bernie sanders people are stoked okay
now covet everyone's searching kovid
lock down now tiger king the wave of
tiger king back to covid
okay the weekend people are interested
pen elon musk this is one tesla stocks
going up
up up up spacex george floyd's now we
have you know black lives matter coming
into the picture
uh bubba wallace must have won a race
people are interested in pandemic covid
black lives matter and the weekend and
that is the end
of this date of vis all right so with
that
um i hope you guys enjoyed that i didn't
make that that was i found that one on
reddit
um i thought that one's very um
indicative
of like just what the power of database
could
can be um so i hope you guys enjoyed
i'm gonna go ahead and open it up to
questions so please
um go ahead and throw um comments in the
uh
in the chat down there i'm gonna throw
this ticker up that says
comment any last minute questions i'll
stay on for like i don't know however
long we have questions
and let's talk so please put it below
put a question
or if you have feedback for the live
session what you want to actually get
more of
i don't have a next live session planned
so like
um if you guys want something like a
topic
put it in the live session or put it in
the comments and i'll try to make it
happen
um so okay aryan's like well a little
off topic
but how do you feel about the hardened
trade so for those who don't know
um i love yeah i already talked about it
i love the nba
um in houston we have an nba team the
houston rockets and we've been really
good we're pretty good for the last like
six years
and our best player is james harden he's
been the leading scorer in the league
for
you know five five years or something
like that
he's been awesome for us and we've come
close to winning
the championship but we've never won it
in the last little bit
and yesterday they traded him because he
didn't want to be with the team anymore
um and they traded him to the nets so
now the brooklyn nets have three of the
best players in the nba
um and how do i feel about it i'm not
from houston originally so it's like i'm
a die-hard fan
although i do i do cheer for the rockets
um i mean he didn't want to be here so
like why keep him here
if he doesn't want to be here right
that's that's how it is
um and i'm excited to see what the nets
are hopefully hopefully they're good
um so yeah hopefully that answers that
question
all right let's see any other questions
pulling it up here guys ask me anything
i'm going to be on here for at least
like
15 minutes so ask me anything you want
now's your time also
if anyone wants to ask me like not in
the comments
and wants to come on and be on video
with me
i'm not opposed to that either i'll take
uh
i'll take uh i'll take anyone up on that
if you want if you want to hop on
this uh live stream real fast and you
totally can
and ask me in real life that's fine with
me or
in real life in real life after 2020.
okay let's see
michael my man michael
have you used visualization to solve
business problems
yes definitely data visualization is key
for i think any position
in any company because it's taking data
and making it
digestible for other people so um
i i actually used to work for a company
where we made
biosensors and these biosensors can
basically sniff the air
and i would use data visualization all
the time to illustrate points um
because these biosensors were used to
like smell drugs or smell bombs
and so sometimes we put them on
transportation
you know like buses or something like
that we drive around the city and try to
smell for
bombs and so i'd make actually really
cool animated
data visualizations that would actually
show the bus going around the city
you know you'd have a dot that would
move around the city as the bus moved
around
and it would leave like a trace and that
trace represented
like the risk level so like a low risk
was blue and a high risk was red
and so we we'd like make this like
animated video
of a bus going around a city and we we
could like show if there was any like
high-risk areas
at that particular time um so that that
was one way that we solved a business
problem
um another one is i've been part of a
uh like you can think of it as we're
trying to make a tough decision
and we actually took like a bunch of
surveys and did like a bunch of tests
and rated a bunch of things
we were trying to compare two different
um
situations and we actually ended i ended
up making a really cool graph that kind
of like shows um
like everyone's opinion where they
thought and like if that could help
shape
the decision we made so those are two
examples michael
of how data visualization can solve a
business problem
i think it's a really nice super easy
simple way
to to solve business problems
because no one likes a table tables are
too hard to read
they're exhausting they're they're a lot
of work
they don't actually show like they're
not easy for a human to digest
um so don't use a table instead try to
make a data visualization
great question though michael i
appreciate it
yeah of course thanks for asking a
question i appreciate it all right
any other questions you guys can ask me
anything you want
even if it's about the nba
trying to pull up um let me pull up on
my phone
all right doesn't seem like too many
more questions i'll stay on for
just like i'll stay here as long as
there's questions but if there's no
questions
i mean it is thursday night which means
tomorrow's friday which i mean
i'm excited about i don't know about you
guys but i'm stoked on that
um so i mean get an early start to your
weekend maybe
just pulling this up here let's see
um
okay well i think um oh we have one from
derek sorry
um derek said how do you think the move
towards remo
more remote business dealings will
affect the ability to present database
in an impactful way
her help probably say the same i think a
lot of graphs were already emailed
before
um maybe we'll all get that augmented
reality though that would be that would
be tight and we can uh
show people data vision in augmented
reality i think that would be really
cool
um so i would like that a lot so i think
it'll probably be the same
i think tools are getting better and hey
that leads into our next question
from vedica which tool or programming
language do you usually use for data vis
okay i think we have 14 people on the
live stream right now
um i'm gonna tell you a secret okay
guys use flourish
this isn't sponsored by flourish but it
should be use
flourish um i'll show you flourish right
now
um it's free it's on the web
um and it's really good and really easy
especially if you don't know how to
program
so i use i use python a lot for data
visualization i use javascript
for data visualization but i also use
power bi i'm a power bi guy i'm not a
tableau guy i recognize tableau's good
but power bi is cheaper
so i use those i use r as well but if
you don't program
um i mean you definitely want to check
out flourish so flourish.studio
guys for whoever's on this call this is
a steal right here
i shouldn't be telling you my secret
weapons okay i'm gonna while that loads
it looks like it's already loaded um
mark said just getting the tail end of
the presentation sorry to be late
i have been never meeting wow mark
you're busy hopefully you're not working
too late maybe your pacific time or
something like that
um but yes this will be recorded this
will be on my
insta or my my youtube first off and
it'll also be on my
my linkedin um in my post section so if
you come back to this link
after this is done it is recorded and
available
all right so back to vedica yeah i use
python r javascript my preferred is
python
but guys check this out flourish.studio
like i said if you're watching this
video if you're one of the 15 people
that i was on right now i am telling you
a secret to get good at data
visualization
is flourish it is free um
let me see
oh wait where's the gallery examples
right here
okay you guys ever seen bar chart races
look at this see this bar chart race
right here
it's showing you the urban population by
country across time
in the lower oh wait let me let me move
this off
right here this is a bar chart so you
can kind of see like here comes brazil
and like look at china go it's beating
the us by a lot they're having a lot of
people
and there comes pakistan and oh here
comes
indonesia and this is really cool you
can make these
in flourish so easy
like super easily drag and drop
like very easy to make data
visualizations this way
you can make like these um
these really cool thank you diagrams let
me pull up this one
so like these are really cool you can
see like they have tool tips that like
really like let you like see like a
specific part
um and you can like have multiple like
it's almost like a powerpoint too
that like walks you through like this
journey and this is free
and you just like click and drag stuff
so
that is a secret tool that i just gave
you guys hope you like it
yeah ggplot's good derek um for r
um for python i use plotly i use dash
i use seaborne mostly for
javascript i use d3 d3 is what the
scrollable stories is made in and it's
the best data visualization
programming language out there a
thousand percent a thousand percent a
thousand percent
but it's so hard to use like if you are
not a good programmer
and i am not that great of a programmer
it's so hard to use
so all right guys i think i'm gonna call
it a night
um so i really thank all of you guys for
being here
um i know this was late i know it's on a
weekday night
and i know you guys have other stuff
going on and i'm so thankful that i had
my linkedin community said they wanted
to hear my presentation even though i
can't reject it
um that really meant uh a lot to me so i
appreciate you guys
um i appreciate you know derek thanks
for all your comments i really
appreciate it
uh tenku loved you being here early
morning
in singapore um michael really good
comments
appreciate it um everyone else thanks
for being here i know we had a lot of
people
um really appreciate it and um yeah
let me know if you want to send me a
message or type in the comments below
what my next live stream
should be on um i'd love to do something
that you guys want to hear about
um but until next time guys which should
probably be sometime next week
i'm gonna call it a night and uh spend
some time with family so hope you guys
do the same
and hope you guys have a good friday and
a blessed weekend catch you guys later

Title: How To Create Beautiful Data Visualizations With Roshaan Khan

Description: Roshaan is the author and creator of what I consider a top 10 data visualization of 2020. The Google Year in Search 2020. Honestly, it's top 5 if you don't include the New York Times. This viz has been shared thousands of times on LinkedIn, Instagram, Tableau public and has caught the eye of many. 

I‚Äôm excited to get to know him better, ask what inspired his viz, and see what else he‚Äôs working on.

What questions would you like to ask him? Comment below!

Video Transcript:
[Music]
awesome
[Music]
ah what's up everyone
welcome welcome welcome super excited to
have you all um we are uh
let's see two minutes late um but we're
super stoked to get started
i'm here with rashaan khan really
excited to have him
um and yeah we're about to get started
but just so you guys know
um hopefully you guys can hear me okay
um
but i can see all your comments so pull
some up here
abanesh super exciting session really
stoked
to uh get started with this um
see ethan nelson is here as well thanks
ethan for joining
glad to have you here and then a yes
also here one of my favorite people to
read linkedin comments from he said hey
avery and rashaan
excited for this one so with that we'll
go ahead and get get into it i'll give a
quick
intro to uh rashaan if you guys
haven't seen him on linkedin um but uh
rashaan is the author and creator
of what i consider a top 10 data
visualization in 2020
and it is the google year in search
2020. um so and i said if you disclude
the new york times
it ends up being a top five data
visualization
so i'm excited to get to know him better
ask him about the viz what inspired him
see what else he has going on um and
yeah so we're here with rashawn
hey avery thank you so much for having
me on i'm really excited to be here
it's a true honor and privilege honestly
because i've been following you for
quite some time
so your content is honestly very
exciting and i'm
it's a huge honor to be talking with you
here also
a big thanks to everyone for showing
support for this session
and i'd like to say hey to everyone
who's um joining the session right now
thank you so much for all the support
that you've shown for not only the
session but also
the visualization if you've seen it as
well um
and uh thanks thank you also for the
complement of it being a top 10
visualization
uh i'm pretty sure other people might
differ on that but i suppose
uh at least at least to gain
some traction in 2020 and i'm glad that
people could like you know take
something out of it
so really excited to be here and uh
really excited to talk to all of you and
you know really to jump into a lot of
um visualization questions or data
science questions or like really have
like a lively discussion both with you
and
also with uh avery as well so yeah
awesome yeah good to be here yeah like
uh rashaan said
we can see the comments so if you guys
have any questions
um feel free to put them in the comments
and i will
show them on the the live stream as well
if you're listening to the video in the
live stream
we had a couple more comments and i'm
sorry if i mispronounced your name
i'm not good with names
so let's see we got samya here he said
excited for this one
thanks we are too we got
a linkedin user thanks for creating this
session pretty excited to take some
learnings from the session
um someone said i see this visualization
at least five times coming in my feet
every day
that's super true i remember uh
when it first came out i was like i was
dming rashaan
like five different instagram accounts i
was like oh my gosh look yeah
look where all the places it's been
honestly so that's like where
um a lot of where i started to see that
it was going on other platforms through
a lot of other people
and to be honest uh it's not just uh
like you know for me seeing that it was
going onto the platforms
through people telling me but a lot of
how i found out about how viral it was
was a lot of my connections were
actually like tagging me
in other people's linkedin posts right
because
of course not everyone um would post my
name which is fine because my name is
already in the visualization so i mean
as far as attribution goes i guess
they're perfectly fine
but um i really wouldn't have been able
to track
a lot of uh the posts that go on
linkedin
had it not been for a lot of my
connections tagging my names and posting
my name
so i really have to thank everyone i
mean if someone's in the chat who did
that
i mean i really huge thanks i'm really
grateful for that
that you know they were able to um you
know give
and notify me of attribution at least
you know
yeah for sure so you you're saying that
basically
like you couldn't keep up with how many
places it was and you didn't even know
all the places where your viz went
your connections were kind of showing
you hey look you know this person's
posting your vids look
i mean this person doesn't know you and
they post you viz
exactly exactly honestly kind of even
restored my faith in humanity a little
bit because
people seemed to care about attribution
in today's day and age when like
attribution is like at huge risk
you know and so i think that uh i really
have to be thankful to
uh my connections and also uh
a lot of the names that you're taking
about the people in the chat i mean
they're quite familiar we
engage with them quite positively on
statuses like sumaiya
and um i it escapes me
one or two other names so looks like we
have like pretty
dedicated viewers here yeah yeah
absolutely you definitely have a lot of
support on linkedin and other platforms
um so let's go ahead and uh get into it
um yeah actually perfect segue uh derek
derek said i love the visualization and
can relate
to seeing it multiple times in my news
feed um i can relate
to the visualization that's one reason
why it really resonated with with me
um so rashawn if you don't mind would
you mind pulling that up just so that
um if people are here who haven't seen
it they can
they can take a look at it and i'll kind
of explain it while you pull it up so
what rashawn did was create and a
visualization that kind of summarized
the year 2020 in terms of what people
googled
um i don't know about you guys but like
knowledge information
is pretty much synonymous with googling
not right now for me
um so if i google something i mean
that's where i'm going to get my
information so it tells a lot about
what's going on in
in my mind um and what i'm worried about
and what i'm interested about
um and so here's here's the viz i'll go
ahead and uh
let's see i'll go ahead and pin it to
the screen so it's a little bit bigger
um and and i really like this because
what sean's done is made a really
elegant visualization that shows
how the worlds how the earth uh was
interested
in different things at different times
during 2020
um and i'll go ahead and let rashaan
answer explain the graph
a little bit more in detail right right
so basically uh what the what the type
of visualization that i put here
is uh i mean different people call it
different names uh
in essence what it is is it's basically
a spark line chart
um i suppose a spark area chart because
i mean
it's not exactly just lines itself um
but it's also known
as a joy plot and a ridgeline plot
now what a joy plot actually is is that
it's usually
seeing several dimensions um in one
visualization
in which your um you could probably say
line charts or
area charts are overlapping right now in
essence
uh in this visualization they aren't
exactly overlapping
um and there's a lot of criticisms to
that uh because
the essence of a joy plot although i
mean there's a huge history
of behind it i'm pretty sure avery knows
as well i mean uh
teach me okay these ridgeline plots and
joy plots they actually originated from
uh this one music album i think was back
in the 70s where
like the cover of this album uh showed
like a lot of like waves
um you know on the face of it and that's
really what gave origin to
uh joy plots and ridgeline plots so and
they're supposed to be overlapping so
what i did here is that i didn't make
them overlap
as again uh there's a lot of criticism
towards joy plots
that you know if you overlap them then
you know it kind of defeats the purpose
of seeing trends
because um you know a lot of like one
dimension could
overlap and obstruct uh you seeing
another dimension for example so i mean
in the in the visualization if you look
at like um
let me see if i can zoom in here uh if
you see like something like
coronavirus and coronavirus symptoms
right they'd be overlapping
yeah and uh it wouldn't be as clear to
you
as it is right now so that that's what
the essence of this visualization was
that i chose this
because you're able to see um
several dimensions at one time uh for
all the top search terms
but more importantly than that um i also
chose this because
i don't know if a lot of people
recognize this but if you kind of like
if you were to
scroll down and give it like one glance
right from the top
and you can kind of like see that you
know there's a certain timeline to it
and right to the right
exactly it moves to the right like it
kind of also gives you
an indication of the progression of you
know going further down the lane
in 2020 right so you can see like from
the start uh like we started right up
here with
kobe bryant's unfortunate demise and
we keep on going and like months are
passing by and you can see how the
search terms
are you know evolving and then finally
right at the end of the year
i mean we end off with a spike in
vaccine because that's what was really
trailing off into um into news outlets
and what media and what
the media outlets were actually
reporting so i mean that's the nature of
this visualization yeah
um so i mean if you have if like avery
or if like any of the uh viewers have
any specific
questions about the visualization then
we could like do like a deep dive into
it
yeah we have a couple but um just to be
explicitly
clear in this visualization if you
scroll back down your x-axis
is is time so each one of those vertical
lines is a month within 2020.
so the left-hand side would be early
2020 and like you said that's when like
kobe bryant died
and then the far right would be you know
closer to the end of the year closer to
2021 where
the u.s elections happened and the
vaccine
kind of became distributed and the
height
of each one of these little lines is
representative
of how many terms or how many times that
that term was searched on google correct
exactly so basically when i guess i
should also kind of
um go into the source of this data
so basically in the last month in
december
i was actually kind of expecting google
trends to
release their year in search report it's
like an annual thing of theirs they've
been doing it for
at least two decades i think they went
back as far as 2005. they always do it
every year
and they always release it because i
mean of course in the 21st century
um you know everyone uses google and
what they type in the search bar and you
know what they're searching for on a
daily basis
that becomes a sort of an approximation
of
you know world culture or world events
right what's going on in the world
i mean and this this visualization i'd
say confidently that it
it's representative of that so that's
why um
google trends they released these uh you
know a year in search
to tell you the top search terms to tell
you you know what the world was like for
that particular year
what people were searching what people
were thinking right what was popular
what wasn't
what was on people's minds and um
that's basically why they release it so
i
actually uh was anticipating this to
come out in december
because last year it came out at around
december 11 to december 15th so i was
anticipating
this coming out as well so once it came
out
basically it's like the top 10 terms
um in different categories so if you
go to the year in search report i mean
they have like a separate dedicated
website for it
you're going to see the top 10 search
terms like general search terms
and then you're also going to see like
the top 10 terms in let's say
regarding people let's say regarding
actresses and actors
let's say regarding tv shows this year
they also had
a separate category of concerts right
what were the top 10 search terms for
concerts because obviously
due to covet many people were searching
um virtual concerts
right i believe there was like one
concert that happened
um by that rapper little knoss
in like fortnight so it's like oh yeah
yeah a lot of these concerts became
quite popular so i guess like
they uh threw that in there so so
that's what the categories are like and
it's always usually like a top ten i
don't think it goes beyond that
um so and if people uh
i don't know if a lot of people have
experience with like
going and looking up a search term but
if you look at the top right
let me just explain the visualization uh
i put that like
small little infographic there to kind
of show uh
what the area chart of each dimension
like represents
so i mean the height like the peak would
actually represent
the highest popularity for a term at a
certain time
because what google does is that of
course they have their
um privacy concerns or rather not
privacy concerns but i'm pretty sure
they have
their good reasons for not releasing uh
the
actual numbers yeah yeah absolute
searches right
and that's also what a lot of people um
when i posted this visualization that's
what a lot of people actually
um were commenting on is that they kept
on questioning why
did google not release their absolute
numbers why are they indexing it
and i think that in a way um
of course there are certain advantages
to releasing absolute searches
i mean because of course if there's like
a peak to
let's say a search then it's not
necessary that that peak would be
uh higher than you know the peaks and
other searches
right so i guess in a way like that
becomes one criticism
of the data quality that google is
releasing because
um the peak of 100 wouldn't exactly be
um
you know it's not like that we can
equate it yeah
you're saying that this this peak this
first red peak in
india versus new zealand you know is
pretty tall
it looks as tall as say the peak in
coronavirus
symptoms you know a month and a half
later
but but just because of the way google
does their you know their data sharing
there's no way for us to know if those
were actually the same numbers or
if if just a lot of people were doing
india
versus new zealand back in you know what
is this march or february
versus yeah there you can't compare one
to another but you can compare across
the time
horizontally exactly exactly exactly so
so let me ask you this
um so first off we had a question here
let me let me pull it up um a lot of
people are asking
what software did you use to create this
visualization
i see yeah so that's that's also a
common question that i got as well
i mean when i posted this um even on
so basically when i when i when i made
this visualization and
i uploaded it across platforms i believe
i initially uploaded it to
uh linkedin and read it and a third
platform it'll probably come back to me
later on
so i mean on reddit you're also part of
the
data as is beautiful subreddit i mean
it's probably the best
subreddit it's definitely awesome yeah
yeah so uh they always ask to uh
not only give your data source but also
give you the tools right so
there i also put you know that i use
tableau to visualize this
and then when i when i uploaded it on
linkedin uh
this project is actually part of a
series of mine in which i
upload visualizations on probably a near
routine basis i suppose like
once in two bi-weekly or maybe monthly
and
i always label these as like uh either
python project
number one right for example or tableau
project number two or three so
excuse me so basically i used uh tableau
to visualize this completely and
um for those again uh we are all
in the data world here so many of us
might know what tableau is
for those who don't know what tableau is
uh tableau
is a visualization software that was um
previously independent but it was
brought out by salesforce and
it is one of the top if not the top
uh visualization software um in the
world and quite frankly also
uh my favorite software as well when it
comes to visualization
okay yeah so yeah i mean so it's it's
like drag and drop
it's similar to microsoft's power bi if
you ever used it
um but i i guess i guess is this easy to
build in tableau like
is is i know you talked about earlier
first off i didn't even know
what what joy plots were we had um
we had some expert uh googling done by
derek and he said the album that came
out was
joy division unknown pleasures is the
term that uh yeah that that sparked
joy plots um i guess is this something
that's easy to do in tableau or is it
kind of difficult
man i must say i'm loving this like the
viewers are quite dedicated that they're
just crawling on the fly here fact
checking
great what we're saying great googling
yeah way to go exactly
exactly um yeah yeah so uh
it's quite i'm so that's what i actually
love about tableau
is that it's so intuitive
uh when it comes to creating
visualization so i mean that's what
uh if we were actually to compare let's
say
power bi and tableau i mean i read
i think probably two weeks ago it was a
wonderful quote
by someone that said uh power bi
is 80 data 20
visualization and tableau is 80
visualization and 20 data and that is
completely true
tableau is your you know go-to
visualization software that
specifically is meant for
visualization and one of the things that
sets tableau apart is that
it's created a lively community in the
world
right so i mean you have so many things
that you can do with tableau and then
you can engage
with the tableau community worldwide so
i mean you have for example
these visualization challenges that
happen weekly
stuff like makeover monday workout
wednesday
sports biz sunday um and then you also
have the community to interact with
on uh twitter and whatnot i mean a few
days ago
i was actually i suppose commenting with
uh one of the top tableau experts kevin
florlage i believe is his name was and
he himself actually
made a post about you know the community
of tableau and what are the different
uh sources in which people can interact
with this community
so and one of them definitely is uh
going to
tableau's own website tableau public and
uploading your visualizations
looking at other people's visualizations
looking at the gallery which is like the
visit of the day which are like top
visualizations from the world
uh going to twitter interacting with
tableau zen masters
and um and then also another source
which is linkedin
so and that's the beauty about tableau i
mean
if i can actually reference here tableau
as you said it's mainly drag and drop so
immediately once you open
the software uh you'll see just
just probably three compartments you'll
see the left side where all your data is
you'll see the top side where you know
which represents
your shelf where you can put your
dimensions and your measures
and then right in front of you is just
the view which is your chart
and it's so intuitive that you literally
just have to click one or two dimensions
one or two measures and the chart
immediately
formulates or you get to drag and drop
it in there right
and tableau tableau has a pretty good
chart library
um you know already built in and they
also have a lot of extensions
in which you could um import different
charts
uh that are like evolving these days so
for example
radial charts and sand key diagrams and
um not only does it have a good chart
library but it also has
the ability for you to make very unique
visualizations from scratch from the
ground up
so i mean you have the ability to use
like calculated fields
and uh different features and options
that allow you to create things that
um previously weren't um could or
previously could not be thought of in
tableau so for example some people
are like such an expert at at using
tableau is that
they create completely new uh
ways innovative ways of like making
visualizations
um i think like just to give a uh an
example
on the fly uh one of the tableau zed
masters i think his name is
ken fleur like there's there's like a
fleur lodge twins there's like two
brothers who are like tableau experts
so ken flerloch what he did is that and
it still sticks with me it was such a
beautiful visualization i mean
um do you mind if i actually pull it up
yeah no go ahead
yeah that'd be awesome please please do
possibly
yeah while you're while you're pulling
that up um
uh we had well we'll get into the uh
more questions yet but one thing i just
wanted to mention
is so one thing i like about uh
rashaan's graph is it's so relatable
i mean you can literally follow along
and say oh my gosh i googled that in
february or
you know i was googling you know joe
biden in november i'm one of those
parts of those those peaks um i think
it's just so relatable and i think
that's um
another thing that's really good about
spark charts
or i guess like we learned a new term
today uh joy
joy plots is that right i knew ridge
lines but i didn't know joy plots but um
is there they're so small and you can
compare one to another very easily
so sparklines are one of my favorite
data visualization tools just because
these small little lines that you know
they don't look a whole
lot meaningful but there's lots of data
packed in those tiny lines and you don't
necessarily need a full
square graph with the axes to understand
a graph you just need sometimes you just
need the little squiggly lines and that
tells you all the information
that you need to know so that's one
reason why i really like
sparklines i really enjoy them because
they give a lot of information with not
a lot of space
um let's see
[Music]
we had we had another question that i'll
go ahead and answer for you
um rashaan is and i i can't see who it's
from it says linkedin user
but did you have to clean up the data or
do any transformations to weed out the
noise
um the majority of the time when you're
getting data from google trends which
all you guys can do
i think it's just trends.google.com you
guys can search
any term and you guys can get a history
i think back to
2004 of how many times that was that
term
was searched on that given day um and
it's all normalized like rashaan said
there's not like a
a specific absolute value it's all it's
all normalized
but it can also allow you to compare
five different ones at once so you can't
compare more than five i think five's
the limit
um but because that goes to another
question that i think um
derek had that we we talked about
earlier saying it could be misleading to
show that tick tock speak is the
equivalent of kobe
kobe bryant's peak that's just the
unfortunate part
about google data is google doesn't want
you to actually know how to compare more
than five at a time
so probably didn't have if i if i can
speak for you probably didn't have to do
much cleaning per se you know because it
comes pretty clean it comes in you know
uh normal form with a with a date and
just some columns it's pretty simple
but you probably had to combine multiple
cv uh csvs into one
yeah right exactly okay perfect now show
us this what do you got here
yeah so basically uh this is what i was
talking about like just to
round back to that question to like
finish it off so
uh this is how intuitive an innovative
tableau is if you're able to see the
screen
i mean this will probably always stick
with me in my mind because
it was just such a like breakthrough in
how people use tableau
so basically what he did is that he
visualized
the history and evolution of the batman
logo right
uh usually what people would do i mean
if we're not going to be
too complex here is that they would
probably take
various pictures of the batman logo
throughout history
and you know you could probably filter
through it by year and you could see
each logo
but what he did here so intuitively is
that he actually
um visualized each logo
separately on like a coordinate plane
and then
like whichever filter the year that you
click on
the logo will actually transform and
take shape
into the logo that you click on so for
example you can see here how it's not
only
it's not like a static image that's just
changing from a to b
it's literally transforming itself right
and
this is what i mean about how intuitive
tableau becomes so i mean if i scroll
down
what he did here is he you he took
advantage of you know
using polygons in tableau and
you know mapping them out in tableau so
that each and every single time that you
click on a year right so for example
here
uh the the coordinate pane will
literally just
take shape into uh the new logo and what
he did here is actually he took
he he put in some pretty good like you
know advanced calculated
fields i suppose and that's where
tableau becomes a little bit complex
even
is that you know if you're pretty good
at math right for example
charting out uh let's say using sigmoid
functions
and um using uh
let's say uh the uh equations of a
circle even
to plot out charts then you literally
are
like i mean i don't want to go as far to
say this but you are really like a
divine gifted user because you would
just be a power user
you know being able to create whatever
you want in tableau
so i mean even going back to you know
that question
of how easy tableau is so just to put it
in perspective
um one time i was actually at my um
uncle's house right i was
uh you know we had a little bit of a
dinner and we actually came a little bit
early so
i had my laptop with me so i was kind of
working on this visualization
and uh one of my younger cousins she's
actually about four years old right she
goes to school
and she saw that i was you know
visualizing you know something in
tableau obviously to her it's not
visualizing it's just like
something happening on the laptop right
just some drawing i suppose
so um i get up and
like i put my laptop to the side on the
couch i get up and i go to meet some
guests
and by the time i come back the laptop
is literally in her lap
and she actually opened up a new tab and
she created a bar chart
no literally and i
don't even of course at the end of the
day it's
it's it's a bar chart but i mean if you
gave any sort of other
visualization software like excel or
even power bi
i really don't think that it would be so
easy for her to
or even anyone else of that age to
really access it now who knows
she could have been randomly playing
around with it maybe she did like random
one two clicks
and in another tab and it opened up
like a bar graph but that basically just
really goes to show that how easy it is
you literally just have the view in
front of you and it's really up to you
what you want to
drag and drop and if we contrast that
with power bi for example
um although i've used power bi as well
but again
going back to that quote it's like 80
data 20
uh visualization it's more of a data
management software than it is a
visualization software
and people have criticized you know the
um lacking in its chart library
because power bi again it was meant to
mainly compete with tableau
and the reason why there are so many
users in the market for it is because
it's a lot cheaper
to uh use than tableau like i think
per user right yeah and it comes often
with
microsoft 360 because it's power bi is a
microsoft product so it comes with
microsoft
365. so a lot of organizations already
subscribe to 365 and they just kind of
get it
in with uh included for free so it's
like why should i pay 70 dollars but i
can get it for free
but i mean obviously there's there's a
lot of a lot of reasons you've just
shown us i mean i haven't seen
an evolving batman logo uh
visualization that's animated in power
bi so that kind of goes
to uh and answer one of these questions
we have here from
from mandeep he says is it accurate that
power bi takes more time compared to
tableau and churning out complex
visualizations
um yeah that's probably true and i think
it's true for like
what what uh what what visualizations
you can come up with
like in general like i don't think you
can make the batman one in power bi
uh that's maybe you can but i'd be i'd
be very surprised
um so okay rashaan let me let me take uh
let me take you for a question here okay
sure you
you've made this awesome graph you know
everyone relates to it
it kind of blows up you see you know
like all your friends are tagging you
and other people's posts that you don't
know
they're like look like my friend rashaan
like he made this
um why why did you make that i think i
think we actually had a question on that
let me see
up right oh yeah ethan ethan asked this
question
what was the motivation behind creating
this viz
awesome awesome yeah that's a great
question so um
at least for me i think that um in the
world of data
one of the like number one soft skills
that you can have
is curiosity right and when i really
started to make a lot of these uh
visualization projects several months
ago when i started to make them
um it really began with me just being
curious about a lot of things
right so i mean in the tableau world um
what a lot of people do
is that you know they kind of just wait
for
like the weekly challenge like makeover
monday to like release a data set
and they'll visualize that and they post
it right um i never was really getting
that into that because
um i mean a i think that it really kills
the curiosity that you know
you would have about other things
because you're just like patiently
waiting for someone to hand you a data
set
and uh b sometimes i think that
a lot of the topics that are provided um
at least for me
like uh not not a lot of them really
uh you know give you know create sparks
within me and again
that's not to like uh throw shade on
people who love makeover monday it's a
great thing for learning and stuff like
that but
i guess it's not just my cup of tea so
basically
again it goes back to curiosity so a lot
of these visualization projects that i
do
it always started with some point
in which i was curious about something
right and i suppose that you know
when we look at those visualizations i
could explain those but specifically for
this
right um so i already knew that google
trends was releasing
uh you know on a yearly basis like i
already knew that they were releasing
their
uh year in search uh report
and it was already coming to i believe
december
and you know i was thinking about my
next visualization project i think
before this
um i think i think the one before this
was the one i did on simpsons
which we'll probably look at later and i
was just really thinking about you know
what's the next thing going to be like
what's the next thing that i'm going to
uh be looking into so it was already
coming to the end of 2020 and obviously
there are only so many words that could
and so many expletives that could
describe you know how the year
2020 was and when google year in search
finally came out
i was like you know what i i think this
is
this should definitely be um my you know
next thing
and i was actually looking for something
in a project to kind of summarize the
year
so basically uh if the other options
that i had
for you know visualizing something
instead of this project
i was actually thinking of visualizing
my netflix data
because one of the things that i wanted
to do
yeah yeah i mean can you really
yeah netflix data if you go to netflix
you can request them to give you
your data and obviously again it goes
down to
data policy and data privacy so they
actually
well their stated time is that they will
send you your data
in 30 days but what when i applied for
it like they sent it to me the next day
and it's so detailed like it's almost
unnecessarily
detailed because they send you like a
second by second
analysis of what you do so it's like
they'll tell you okay
yeah they'll tell you like when you
press the pause button when you press
the play button which advertise
advertisement did you see they'll even
tell you uh like
for example if you're watching a show
and like you like you rewind
10 seconds like they'll tell you that as
well oh wow so
right and um that just really goes to
show how amazing the data team is at
netflix
um i've read a lot about them but in any
case that was actually another uh
idea of mine because i was really
looking to put in something that i could
summarize the year
2020 of so one thing was like you know
my netflix data in which i could like
summarize what i
what i watched for the year um but then
of course when this idea popped into my
mind
it definitely uh you know trumped
the other idea for me so like that's
where the inspiration came from here
that is that is crazy i didn't i did not
know that
that that existed i know um i have yeah
i have dustin here
saying i think i'm going to lose about
30 hours of my life mining all these
data sets you're teaching us about
i i know that there's a lot that you can
get um
like for instance a lot of people don't
know you can get your linkedin data
which is pretty interesting
to see all of your messages who you're
connected with
um a lot of a lot of their emails and
stuff like that
um instagram you like all of your likes
and search history and
all the posts you've saved but i didn't
know about i didn't know about the uh
netflix one so yeah yeah i got some
some funny comments from that saying how
scary it is and
and how neat that is but okay so going
back to the question okay what what
motivated you
to to make this viz you said curiosity
um
okay but i mean that's good answer
but like not all of us are sitting at
home like is that what you do you just
sit at home and make data visualization
like like oh friday night time to make a
date of like
wow like okay sure
that's why you chose this topic
we're back hello can you hear me yeah i
can hear you okay
did we cut out there yeah all right i'll
ask that question um
can uh the question the question is okay
like do you sit at home and make data
visualizations on fridays
like is that is that what you do or like
why were you making data visualizations
in the first place
yeah yeah so i mean um i guess this kind
of goes a little bit back into
my origin with data i mean i i always
see that when i
interact with data professionals they
always have like some sort of origin
story like just like
batman or something like there's
something that always triggered them
some
somewhere in their life i mean for you
uh i you know i've been following you
and i see your content so
um i think it was i mean again not to
like go into your history or something
but i think it was somewhere
along when you were doing your chemical
engineering degree that you
yeah you know switched over to data yeah
so for me
um i was actually you know when i was in
my business degree i was doing marketing
and
um i actually started to take more
analytics electives and that's really
what
uh started to that's when the love story
happened basically i started to fall
in love with data and there's like so
many reasons for
why you know that passion for data
exists i mean like we could probably go
into it another segment
but um that's basically when it started
to happen and as
as it progressed throughout my degree
and then also when i graduated
because i graduated with a bachelor's in
analytics
um it really started to make me uh data
oriented like i just started to see the
whole world
like in terms of data like you know kind
of like in the
in the matrix movie where you see
everything in like those green vertical
rows coming down like
i really thought that you know it was i
thought it was it was like a red pill
moment
right it was like i could start like
seeing the world for what it is or
for what i wanted it to be and um it was
at that point
where i really just started to look at
everything in data so it's like from
outside
you know how can i convert something
into data like you know um
you know looking at stuff like health
analytics i mean this year i'm actually
starting to record a lot of my things in
life so it's like
i'm recording like what i eat and the
vitamins i take and stuff like that you
record what you eat
yeah so i mean again we could like go
into that separately but if you see on
is beautiful uh this at the end of the
year they started posting
you know their year end of
visualizations
yeah you know what they do you see that
right i've tried to do it though it's so
it's a lot of work to keep track of all
of that
yeah i know so i mean you have to
basically uh pick
few dimensions to be dedicated to yeah i
mean as far as
data is beautiful concerned a lot of
people went crazy with it
um i think there needs to be a line
drawn because a lot of people started
visualization uh visualize visualizing
their
trips to the washroom
did they do it manually please tell me
they used a sensor because i could
understand if you use the sensor but did
they do it manually
i think they did it manually oh my gosh
i don't want to get too
disgusting here but they did it in
pretty excruciating detail
in terms of oh yeah shape and color
but
gross there's definitely a line so uh
yeah so basically coming back to that
it's just uh
when i started these visualization
projects it comes from that mindset
of just being curious and my first
project
i mean i guess we'll go into it um uh
later on but it always just starts with
like uh a eureka moment
like i'll just be looking at something
or doing something or watching something
and immediately i get like hey there
must be data on this or like i could do
something with this
right i could visualize this i could
probably get insights out of it
and um talking about you know sitting
down on a friday night yeah
basically that that that really is what
happens um
at least i i would say like bi-weekly
i'm looking at things like you know
different projects that i could do
so almost every week i'm really just um
investing myself in in terms of
uh seeing what i could really do uh in
terms of a visualization
and to be honest i really think that uh
you know i think the world itself should
really go towards this
in terms of allowing more data to be
accessible
so we have a lot of apis for like you
know different things that we can see
like you know netflix and instagram and
stuff like that
but if we live in a world like where we
have apis for
a lot more things uh that that like
are accessible to us like let's say
having some
have having some sort of iot device that
is linked to our car
that could you know grab data on our car
and you can visualize it i think that
you know
uh that would not only a put us put a
huge interest into data but
i think that that would really improve
the quality of many people's lives
so it's just this data-driven mindset to
always you know just visualize something
okay so i
i kind of heard two things one you think
it's fun and you're curious
and two is is you kind of have the
mindset of well i believe in analytics
you know i got a degree in analytics
i want to use um i want to use analytics
in my
in my life you want to live a
data-driven life and so
you want to take advantage of the
scenarios okay that makes sense i know
i know i agree with what you said about
like making data accessible
um i know i keep track like um i use
mint for like budgeting and
that just keeps track of all of my
spending for all of my accounts so
that's like
right there i want to try to make it
data driven so i have a couple projects
that i did with mint
um and then i wear i wear my apple watch
um whenever i work out and when i sleep
and so i get my sleep data and my like
calories data
um and stuff like that i know i mean i
notice from your profile uh your dog
also has
it's true it's true she hasn't worn it
in a bit i
i collected a lot of data and i never
really used it for that so i need to go
back and do something with it because
yeah she does i bought a fitbit it was
like it's like 60 bucks i was like i'm
so nerdy i can't believe i'm doing this
i did it just for the analytics like
she's a healthy dog like
i just i just wanted the data on her
that's
all that should be a quote honestly i
did it just for the analytics i mean
that's what
uh a lot of what happens but i must ask
this i mean was it like
a it was like specifically made for
animals or was like a human fitbit no
okay it's a it's a dog specific fitbit
um
okay i'm not even sure how well it works
to be honest it like goes on their
collar
and yeah it i need
i need to look at it again to be honest
uh yeah yeah yeah
that'd be awesome honestly yeah yeah so
okay so okay so you did it for fun you
did it because you want to live
an analytics life okay let me ask you
this this is this is an important
question
um that i think a lot of people can
benefit from why did you share it
because okay it's fun it's fun for you
you made the visualization
you learned oh okay i see how people
googled for joe biden um yeah you know
why why share it
right so um i mean in a few years back i
mean not even a few years back but one
or two years ago
um i was on different social media
platforms like facebook and instagram
and whatnot and i
really like i just couldn't um
find my voice like i never really
interacted with people even though i had
like a huge
like my friends list right i never
really interacted and i didn't really
like the content
that a lot of people are showing like it
was just like jokes and memes and
politics and stuff like that
and i really just couldn't find you know
something where i can engage with i
couldn't find a proper
community and when i joined linkedin you
know
some of that lingered on or carried on
to the platform as well
um but when i really started to when i
when i started my visualization journey
i joined some of these platforms so for
example
when i joined data is beautiful on
reddit um that
really motivated me to uh not only do
these projects but also share them
because i was a part of a community in
which i could not only
interact with people who also have these
similar interests as i do
but also gain their feedback on you know
the things that i'm doing
and especially when um you're talking to
data professionals
um i really enjoy their feedback i mean
even if it's
criticism or constructive criticism i
mean i always take it
as something positive because it's
something that could be improved in the
future
and i so i share it there on reddit and
then i also share it there on linkedin
because
i mean of course i'm developing a
personal brand of mine basically at
least
for my country in which i think that um
i mean not to be obnoxious but i think
that i've
pretty much solidified myself as like
one of the leading
uh voices and data science for my
country at least
so i i uploaded there to kind of show a
portfolio of you know these
visualization projects that i'm doing
and i think that at least for this
visualization
it was probably extremely important to
share because i mean
this is reflecting uh human behavior
throughout the
entire year right and i think to not
share it right would probably be a
little bit
uh odd or weird if like for the lack of
a better word because
this is this is showing like people's
behavior this is showing like you know
uh cultural influence around the world
and it's like
um i think it it's definitely it should
be out there to
for people to see um i think that one of
the main incentives
would be is that you know to kind of uh
uh
you know develop my portfolio because i
also share this
on tableau public which is like where my
tableau public profile is and i mean
it's to
develop a portfolio there but it's also
to submit a lot of these visualizations
to
a visit of the day for example um which
this visualization also got
uh in december so these are basically
the incentives behind it i mean i
i don't really have any uh issues with
sharing these visualizations i mean a
lot of people found
uh some meaning out of it and i'm just
really grateful for
you know a lot of the positive response
that people got from it or people gave
to it
yeah that that makes sense um okay so if
i were to kind of digest that that
answer
um i heard you know okay i wanted to get
feedback from people
um which is which is awesome um i heard
you know i wanted to sh i want to build
my portfolio and build my personal brand
um and also like i think this is
important for the world to see and i
think all three of those are
are really good uh are really good um
answers um great i i wanted to quickly
get to
a little change of topics here but um
eleanor put this question earlier and we
didn't get to it so i want to get to it
because he reposted it
um he said if there if there's any what
other charts would you have considered
using in making the google trends so if
you didn't use
you know this combination of whether we
call it a joy plot or a spark line
or a ridge plot what else would you have
done
so uh the funny thing is is that when i
started with this project
i actually didn't go to tableau as my
first option
mainly because um my previous projects
yeah yeah actually i was considering so
in my other projects
i i think i had three or four projects
before in tableau now tableau is always
my go-to visualization software
right but a lot of these projects that i
put i mean
not only do i create um not only do i
look for
variety in terms of topics so for
example i've did
i've done something on politics on the
tv industry
on media and stuff like that so i always
try to change it up but i also try to
look for
variety in tools so so far uh
one of my projects has been completely
python driven right and the rest of them
have been tableau
so for this one i actually started off
with trying to do something in python
right and i was looking for modules in
python that would
um you know effectively
visualize this into a joy plot because
um there are more efficient uh modules
in r for example like for example i
think it's called
ggplot or gg ridges that would
just outright visualize this into
a ridgeline plot uh in python it's not
so
easy because uh there's only two or
three uh
packages that were like open source to
create things like
sparklines are definitely hard they're
they're hard to do in python
and they're hard to do in any software
to be honest
and when i visualized it in python and i
wrote the code for it
it wasn't looking so good i mean uh not
only was it difficult to use
i mean because you have to try to use um
these
months this time series as like a
dimension and that's quite hard in
python because python is like looking at
it as distributions
so that was it was difficult on that
part and
when i when i when i was doing it in
python i just didn't really see it
happening
so i was like all right let's save let's
shelf python for like another project
for variety
and then i came back to tableau and i
was like all right let's do this
in uh tableau so that's like one thing
and in terms of uh different graphs i
mean
i really didn't think about any other
graph um or
like type of graph when it came to this
because again we have to look at
you know the fact that we're visualizing
a number of dimensions
across the time series so in order for
you to see each individual one
that's like the best way is to do that
is through a joy plot verb
yeah you need you needed it to be a time
series because it is a time series so
that means you have
the x axis pretty much always being the
the time element
and then you needed to be the ability to
do um
to do comparisons from one to another
and
and for those yeah so that's called
small multiples
um edward tufte talks about a lot about
that a lot in his book um and the
ability to
for a powerful chart one of the one of
the most important
parts is the ability to compare one
chart to another chart
um so what you could have done is you
could have done instead of a
one column n rows you could have done
like an n by n
square but as you do that you're kind of
making
the graphs fatter and it kind of becomes
less interesting over the year versus
just having them be long
horizontal lines and and you can kind of
get that flow as you scroll down i
i think i think the the spark lines made
a lot of sense in that case
yeah i mean in terms of even the nature
of graphs so i mean excuse me i mean
this is again it's uh it's like a
sparkline-esque type of graph i mean we
just call it sparkline and
um at least in terms of the type of
graph i
didn't think of anything else but if you
see these individual
i mean ridge lines or sparklines for
them i
thought of doing something different um
i did think of making uh these peaks
like rounded edges
a bit because i just thought kobe bryant
it's like just like a straight up it's
like a mountain yeah
it's a triangle yeah exactly exactly and
again
i'm really grateful for everyone's
response to it but at least for me at
the time i thought that you know
it probably wasn't so appealing like
maybe i could jazz it up or something
so in tableau doing something like that
making rounded edges
it is a bit of a task you have to kind
of input
um different calculated fields to really
get the rounded edges
actually a tablet is called like a
gradient rounded edge um
again kevin florelage is like the one
that
pioneered that type of design so i mean
uh i tried to do something like that but
i just didn't really see it happening
and then at the end of the day i was
like you know what i think it's more
about
um especially this is a visualization
principle as well it's more about the
simplicity of it
and i think that a lot of people would
gain a lot more from just
seeing it as it is rather than investing
a lot more time into just you know
making a rounded edge which would convey
basically the same insight anyways okay
yeah
that that makes sense um ethan asked a
similar question
you know and i know um ellie bublic
before this
uh meeting asked a similar question and
said after having made this
visualization and gotten the feedback
would you are you going to make first
are you going to make a graph for next
year
and if so what changes would you make
so i'm also anticipating that next year
because
uh you know again this visualization got
like
it like uh immaculate response like i
can't even start to explain it and
it just got it was so viral and seen by
like
millions of people around the world that
i think that
a lot of people like one second one
second one second yeah can everyone just
like digest that number millions
like like and and he's not joking like
okay so i think
i think on your your original post
you had i don't know almost 2 000 likes
which i mean yeah the view to like ratio
i don't know what that is but
i mean that's probably like over a
hundred thousand views
if i had to guess yeah yeah it was
if you were publi if you were on
tableau's
you know visit the day that's probably
another i mean tens of thousands if i
had to guess
and then i shared we shared like a bunch
on linkedin
i found you on like three or four
different uh
instagram accounts i know actually one
of them here
uh was here earlier i left a comment um
data stuff plus was here let me see if i
can find the comment yeah
but anyways so millions of people saw
this everyone
okay but okay are you gonna remake it
yeah so uh that's the thing that you
know i think that
a lot of people are gonna have this on
their mind for the next year so
i think that i mean again i don't know
how strong people's memory memories are
but i think that by the time next year
comes when google trends uh releases
their 2021 report
uh immediately when they release it and
it's like all across the news with their
video and whatnot i think that's going
to recall this visualization and then
i think a lot of the top visualization
experts are definitely gonna
jump or pounce at this right because
when i was speaking
exactly when i was speaking to some of
them i mean even kevin florlage he was
like i wish i thought of this
you know i wish i uh could do this
myself so
uh that definitely makes it um uh i
think we're gonna see a lot more
visualizations next year this as well
and probably a lot more twists to it as
well because
i i can bank on the fact that you know
next year
um a lot of these visualization experts
are definitely going to have
are definitely going to give this a try
uh so for next year at least for me
i'm definitely it's definitely on my
like goal list
i am for sure going to uh do this again
uh as soon as the report comes out at
that time i'm going to see
how much variation i can put into it
because again
tableau is like a learning journey so
i'm always experimenting and doing
something so maybe at that time
i might have some flair or some spice to
add into it to make it different from
the year before
uh more so different than the terms that
are going to be included in the
visualization
but uh i think that uh it's definitely
something to have in store next year and
uh at least as far as data is beautiful
is concerned i think we're going to see
a lot more of these visualizations there
as well
yeah that's that's a good point and i
think i think i mean
obviously what you came up with i mean
you've seen google do something similar
i mean they do some sort of year in
search right and you've seen spark lines
before and you combine the two
um so i mean you were inspired from
those those two sources
and i think that's interesting because
you know someone in this audience
could be really inspired and say oh look
what you know look at what shawn did
last year look what this other person
did you know
20 years ago or this other girl i mean
look at this
uh album cover and like what if we
combine these two
what can i make and i think that's the
most interesting thing is we just get
inspiration from
so many different sources and that's
part of the reason why
you know you're on you know tableau
public and you're looking at what
everyone else is doing it's it's to be
inspired and you just never know
what you might make and so you know
someone in this audience could could
look at this and next year they're going
to make you know one that's even better
and that's so exciting exactly and uh in
terms of influence even
when i released this so excuse me
when i released this there was actually
a lot of many people who actually made
their own iterations for their own
countries
so when i released this uh people from
turkey people from brazil
um and then a few other countries
probably in like
southern europe or like south america
they started to
in their own language as well they
started to visualize the top
search terms for their own country right
and they would have that in their
language and they would share it as well
so i really saw a lot of uh
you know i saw this visualization
inspire a lot of
uh data people to make their own
iterations of it
because again it went uh pretty viral i
mean
uh in addition to that uh virality i
mean on when i uploaded it to reddit
even
uh i thought that this was like
literally just another uh visualization
project that i'm putting it on there i
really didn't even expect this to like
viral as it did uh actually what
happened immediately when i
uploaded it uh in the first like half
hour it got like
a thousand or like one or like 1200
likes which is like normal for some of
the visualizations that i post there and
then it trails off like
it just ends there uh in the first and
like the first one and a half hour i
opened the app again and then i started
to notice that people are
like just one after the other they're
commenting on a commenting comment
and on every single tr on every single
trend and then it had like
2 000 comments all of a sudden and it
was at like 10 000
likes and then uh i open it again
and then it keeps going and going like
15
20. what does that feel like i couldn't
even imagine and the funny thing is is
that i'm not even
i didn't even know much about reddit i
just joined it
so i started to get the notification
that your your post is trending on the
front page
i didn't even know what the front page
was kidding i actually i i talked to my
cousin
i was like hey i'm trending on the front
page of reddit um
on the front page of the internet yeah
on the front page of the internet like i
googled that's what they call it
yeah they call it and i didn't even i
couldn't even i thought that maybe it
was like the front page of like data is
beautiful i'm like
what it was saying you're trending
number one on the front page and then i
asked my cousin and he's like
you don't know what the front page means
that's like literally the front page of
the internet that's like your post is
being seen
by hundreds of thousands if not millions
of people right now
and then and then another message she's
like you've owned the internet first
for the day i was like okay i don't know
what exactly that means
so then i went to the popular tab i
didn't even check the popular tab
like until my cousin told me what the
front page was and then i saw my post
was like number one there
and then wow for the better for the rest
of that day
i did nothing at all just except like i
made my own battle station on my own
laptop and i literally just started
seeing
what people are commenting how much it
how many upvotes it's getting
and i'm the type of guy that like if you
comment on something i did
i will always reply to you uh i couldn't
i just couldn't at this point because
it's like
everyone kept commenting like second
after second it was just so
difficult to reply and i at one point i
just stopped
commenting i just watched it as it was
happening and like i just couldn't
uh believe it so yeah that's that's kind
of like the story behind reddit
so so what's come of of all of that
like for instance i mean you and i
wouldn't have been talking had you not
posted this visualization
but i mean as far as you're comfortable
like what else do you feel like you've
you've benefited from posting
from first making this visualization
because that was the first step but then
you didn't stop after just making it you
shared it what have you benefited from
those two steps
so basically um again on reddit so like
it was trending number one so on reddit
at least it went
like i couldn't even imagine it to be
what it was on reddit
and then when i shared it on linkedin um
i mean for the first day again people
they normally
reshare my visualizations they like
commented like you know
the whole that whole song and dance it
was the same pretty much but
pretty much when i uploaded it to reddit
that was when everything just changed
completely
the very next day after i uploaded it to
reddit is when on linkedin
all the top data influencers started to
share and
these are people that i've been
following for a long time and
i wouldn't even imagine like you know uh
recognizing me
steve norrie i saw shared it i remember
uh christina uh long last name
yeah i'm sorry if i'm butchering her
name but yeah her
uh and then of course a lot of data
influencers started to comment on these
posts like danny ma
and a lot of other people who aren't
dating influencers but also like
influencers on linkedin we have like
hundreds of thousands followers
and uh again i'm glad that people tagged
me in those posts because i could like
track engagement and it was just
insane like those i one post so steve
nuri he's like
the like number one linkedin top voice
right yeah his status that
got five six thousand wow uh christina i
think
also got probably near a thousand this
one other
uh profile he's a ceo that got thirty
thousand likes
about the highest yeah that's the
highest i've ever seen
on linkedin and i didn't i didn't even
know him like i connected to him
afterwards
so just the amount of re-sharing that
happened on linkedin
i just couldn't imagine it and and it's
still getting reshared to this day i
mean just the other day
yeah right and i'm always just getting
notifications every single day
just the other day uh i think one of the
directors at uh
boston consulting group i believe where
i think it was mckenzie
he shared it um and then another
technology
ceo he also shared it one of the biggest
developments though
when on linkedin especially is i mean if
i scroll down here
you can see and this was also a lot of
what people
on reddit said is that it was a great
year for death and tick tock because
like they were just trending throughout
the year
oh yeah um when i shared this
i think like the whole core team at
tiktok they started re-sharing this as
well
so the marketing director or i think he
was the head of marketing
at tick tock he reshared it because
obviously
this is great for his brand you know
because tick tock was trending
throughout the year yeah
consistently a lot of the recruiters
shared it at tick tock
like the tick tock team was basically
really appreciative of you know this
visualization that they were able to
see it and not only tick tock but then
also people from google also saw it so i
mean again i think christina
also counts because she's a consultant
at google so obviously there
uh the vice president of marketing
at google also liked this as well he
didn't share it but like i saw him
wait you saw that he liked it i saw that
like
i was i was going as far as to go into
the likes of statuses as well
no you think it was probably on i don't
think it's steve nuri's i think it was
someone else's i think
it was probably you're going into other
people's posts
likes likes yeah i can't engage with
them
oh my gosh that is dedication
milestones so for me and um so i mean as
far as uh c-suite executives are
concerned i mean just a few days back
i got a comment from uh the vice
president at
uh bank of uh bank of america i think it
was
and he said that he personally shared
this visualization with his team
he also has he also heads up the tableau
user group for
bank of america so i was just
blown away with just the amount of
and i really wish that i had like active
tracking data
where i could like really see who's seen
it and who's not
uh not to be obnoxious but like i just
think that you know i really would like
to see
or know if like one of like the most
powerful people in the world even if it
like just glanced at it going through
the feed like i was just like
like elon musk or like uh sergey brin
and larry uh page at google i wonder if
they saw it or something even if it's
just like a glance in their feed or
maybe their employees told about it well
if it went on twitter
elon saw i'll tell you that much elon
sees everything on twitter yeah
yeah that's true that's true um
i got a question for you yeah okay it's
an interesting question
um and and maybe this already exists um
but we have a question and i'm sorry if
i mispronounced your name
from sekanya and actually our only uh
this is being live streamed right now on
linkedin and
on youtube so our only youtube comment
was from joanna george and they these
people ask kind of similar questions
and they ask could you ever do a
tutorial on this
vid together with the dataset link and
and and okay so first off would you ever
consider doing
you know a tutorial of how you made it
and second off
when you posted on our data is beautiful
you showed your data set and said what
you used
and i don't know any of the rules for
posting for visit the day on tableau do
you have to explain how you made stuff
or
have you ever have you ever explained
how you made this graph kind of more in
depth
right right so um as far as right
data is beautiful i mean you basically
just have to like state your data set
and your tool so it's not
so in-depth and when i posted this
visualization
a lot of people were asking me i mean a
they were asking me which software did i
use and b they were also asking me
you know can you make a tutorial on this
and i was just really
grateful for you know a lot of people
saying that they would actually
uh legitimize me or deem me as some sort
of tableau authority that they would
want to see
a tutorial on that and i honestly i
contemplated doing it and i think that i
might do it later on in the year uh to
really show because i'm again i'm all
open source like
i i have no interest in like hiding
anything like uh i love being open
source and letting people
uh see what the visualization is and
what data is and you know doing their
own iterations of stuff
so i think that later on in the year i
would definitely um
you know do a tutorial on it probably
like a quick two because again this
this was something that you can quickly
whip up in tableau i did take a lot more
time
in making it because i want to like
perfect the detail and stuff like that
but it is definitely something that
people can apply and yeah i think i'm
i i would look into doing a tutorial
and maybe doing a series or something if
if that's what people
like really like about it actually as
far as the visit of the day is concerned
um uh no no you don't have to exactly
open source it like you just upload the
visualization and stuff
actually the thing is i didn't know that
uh
this was uploaded this was chosen as a
visit of the day for like
two days i didn't even know that this
would
i i i applied for this to be a viz of
the day
on like i think thursday night and i
had i didn't have hope that you know
this would become a visit of the day i
just always apply
uh this was when like this was like a
few hours before the linkedin
hype started to happen uh so i think i
completely forgot about
you know my visit of the day application
and it turns out that they actually
uploaded this
on friday the very next day like they
actually chose it the next day i had a
thousand submissions
they uploaded it and i didn't know and
they don't send you an email or anything
so by
sunday uh i just casually looked at the
visit of the day
and not even like it wasn't even like a
thought that oh maybe i was chosen i was
actually like i saw a friend of mine's
uh visualization and she put a link
in her visualization so i was like okay
let's go to tableau and then when i was
at tableau i looked at the gallery
i scrolled down and then i see this
there
and i just couldn't even fathom it to be
honest as far
as far as um the achievement of this
post was concerned i think that
the visit of the day was like the thing
that i was most proud of and
i i couldn't even fathom it i had to go
to my living room
to sit down and process it like you
watch the office right like
just like michael scott said my mind was
going like a mile an hour
you know i really couldn't just i
couldn't fathom what was going on so
that's good what's cool about it wow
that is super awesome
um yeah we're having we're having some
people drop off so thank you thank you
guys for all
joining the last we're gonna go about 10
more minutes
and i just want to ask um rashaan a
couple questions
um so i know we had one from ryan
earlier from ryan collins
he asked earlier um yeah he asked
specifically
uh and i know um derek also wanted to
ask this
uh what is your what is your pet peeve
in in data visualization do you have one
yeah um i think that uh so first off
first of all i think i have like one or
two
um when i see a lot of these
visualizations uh that have
so much text on them that is a huge
pet peep of mine because then they they
aren't
uh so much visualizations as they are
infographics and there
definitely is a clear line that you have
to discern between the two
and i've seen visualizations that
literally have like three paragraphs
of text on the vis itself i mean they're
not allowing data to speak for them
which is what you need to do and that's
a proper visualization principle i mean
if you're gonna have so much text
on your vis you might as well just like
forget the visualization and just
create like a 10-page report in which
people can just read what you're saying
right i mean you have to let data speak
for you
um in any visualization that i do i
always try to
make sure that i limit it to like three
to four lines
of like text in which i explain what i'm
doing what it's for and stuff like that
so that's one uh and then the second
thing i think is
um again what really drives data
visualization
is simplicity you you're in the game of
showing trends and like giving
information to people that they can
easily digest
right all types of people and i think
that when you're
being unnecessary complex in your
visualization it really defeats the
purpose of it so
a lot of these days i'm seeing people i
mean
sand key diagrams are already a very
complex thing in and of itself
and a lot of people execute them
beautifully but now i'm seeing different
iterations of like
circular sand key diagrams in which you
can't exactly discern
uh between uh exactly what's happening
now tableau experts do a lot in like you
know
executing them perfectly but i think
like a week back i saw this
visualization from someone
who was trying to visualize the
appearance
of every game of thrones character in
every episode in every season
and they did a circular sand key to
connect every character
to every episode of every season and
when they did it there's just i mean a
there was just so much white space
and b there were just so many lines that
you really couldn't even tell what was
going on in the visualization again this
is game of thrones
which is like 50 main characters and of
every episode of every season
so i think exactly
and that's like a pet peeve of mine to
always just keep it simple
i think across all my visualizations
it's always just
something that's extremely simple where
even like a lay man off the street like
i could
show it to them and you know they'll
probably be able to get what it is so i
think that that's the pet people might i
mean what about you like what's your pet
peeve
um yeah i think i think you're right um
text
on is one um mitchell mitchell kind of
paraphrased
he kind of quoted what you said he said
if you're going to have a lot of text on
your visualization you might as well
just write and not have a visualization
yeah um yeah i agree when people try to
be too complicated i think it gets a
little bit silly sometimes
my my my pep even data visualization is
pretty simple
and that is the pie chart is now
underrated people love to hate on the
pie chart and i under yeah
and i understand why it's that's
controversial
but like i think they're i think the pie
chart has a time and a place
like i understand it's hard to compare
angles
i understand that and i understand that
the first thing you read in a data
visualization book
is pie charts suck but i think it's too
simple
and i think i think pie charts can be
cool like they don't
the default ones no okay you got to be
really like methodical about it
but i don't think pie charts suck hot
take
yeah yeah i mean uh as far as books are
concerned uh actually reading data uh
storytelling with data
these days so it's like it's so true
that i'm calling
affluent is that her name yeah
yeah and i think it was like the first
10 pages in which she
just clearly stated out you know forget
pie charts exist
right and so there definitely is a lot
of hatred towards pie charts but
yeah i see what you're saying i think
that there definitely is and with any
visualization there's a time and a place
i mean uh pie charts can definitely
uh you know uh do the job for you
when they need to do it um and as far as
data visualization is concerned i mean i
must say i even
checked out some of your visualizations
and in terms of simplicity
if we look at you know that
visualization i saw where you were
visualizing the um the
running path of two nba players oh yeah
on the court dude you got me
studying i'm impressed you you know i
know you're in stuff you did your
homework
yeah yeah and i really like that because
it was just so
like it was so simple but so meaningful
because all you
did was just give the visualized path
and you gave a title
and that's it and just from that i can
already tell what you're trying to
visualize
rather than you know you trying to add
text to it
explaining what the nba is how did you
do this what the footpaths could mean
in terms of where they go on the court
right i mean
it's simp uh i i there's that saying i
guess
less is more and that's that's that
certainly should be a visualization
principle
yeah i like that um speaking speaking
about books
um what what books do for i guess first
off what books do you about data vis
do you enjoy um and then second off i
guess just what books in general do you
like
so uh a lot of my uh favorite genre i
mean a long time ago i used to like
self-help but like that trailed off i
didn't really like self-help anymore
because
it kind of seemed to be the same thing
said over and over again but what i
really got into
about a year back is a lot of fun books
that
uh describe uh amazing like statistic
concepts statistical concepts and like
fun ways
so for example i love freakonomics right
that's all data
which they just show these ridiculous
phenomenons in like new ways um
again and i love analytics and data
visualization books so like these days
i'm reading
uh storytelling with data and i also
like
um people who are who have like
people who have achieved a lot in their
life
uh by using data or using analytics so
in the past year i read a book by i
think his name is edward
thorpe uh the title of the book was uh a
man of all markets
from las vegas to wall street how i
conquered
uh how i beat the house and the market
like it's a pretty long title
it was basically the guy who created
invented card counting and then he was
like such a statistical genius that
he used to like completely like take
down
vegas for like you know all of its uh
winnings and then he went to wall street
and then he earned a killing there
actually if you see that uh if you've
seen that movie
21 i think it's called blackjack or i
think it's just called 21 with the mit
blackjack team
uh that's actually expired from him
because he started
card counting so it's inspired by his
story
okay yeah i'll have to check that one
out that one sounds good
um what what um what what are you doing
now
like what's what's on what's in the
future um
what are you up to what are your plans
yeah uh i suppose that i should probably
um maybe give a little bit of my like
history
yeah we didn't we didn't really get into
that we got right into the viz
there was too much good stuff to talk
about the visualization we didn't get to
talk about the person so yeah
give give a quick quick summary this
should have been at the beginning
my bad yeah we're no no the viz speaks
for you
we understand the viz is good so thus
yeah
rashaan also must be good but yeah give
us a quick
uh introduction to who you are and where
are you going
yeah so uh basically i was um i'm
natively
born and raised in canada so i lived in
toronto ontario
for for 15 years basically until like i
was age 15.
so um by that time uh my family and i
like we made a decision to
we made a decision to migrate to uh
pakistan which is like our home country
it was like a family decision
so ever since then i came here and
completed my education
um and then i also finished my uh
undergraduate in
uh it was a bachelor's in business
analytics
so um and then ever since then um
i've actually been at least since
graduating
i've actually been spending a little bit
of time with my family due to
a few commitments that i have with them
so uh these days what i'm actually doing
is that i'm
focusing a little bit more on my
analytics consult
being an analytical consultant so about
a year ago
i was actually able to land a consulting
contract with uh baskin robbins
baskin robbins in pakistan yeah because
they yeah
they they launched here in like 2017
so about a year ago um i was able to
basically
uh become a consultant for the analytics
consultant so in the past year i've
basically been
focusing on that and like being an
analyst consultant i've like
you know done i basically designed
a research study for them to
um you know deep dive into their
consumer research
find a lot of the trends and insights
that they're looking for in terms of
their objectives
uh these days it's in the last phases in
which i'm reporting
so probably at the end of this i'll
probably be moving on to
another uh consulting contract i'll
probably be joining an organization
uh maybe within a few months time at
least for the time being because i'm
you know just spending time with my
family at the moment so i guess the
consulting
yeah uh works out are you are your
hashtag open for
open for work like are you are you like
hireable for like contract consulting
jobs
um as far as to be honest i'm not
exactly
again it's basically the commitments
that i have with my family at the moment
um i'm spending a lot of time with them
so a lot of the
um work that i do it's really based on
um you know like i basically get to
choose what i'd like to do at the moment
that's how that's how we are currently
so it's like i am
like i would probably look for
uh firms to consult for but it's not
exactly
it's not exactly horizon so much because
right now again
so much as family is concerned but yeah
uh i
do love consulting i do love analytics i
love data
and that is my career that is my work
and
i definitely could be uh delving into it
within the future as far as goals are
concerned i think i have pretty
good goals this year as as well as you
do i've seen your goals as well
so i think that we have pretty lofty
goals uh this year to you know at least
uh delve further into data you know make
some impact
uh i don't have the goal to run a
marathon
which is uh a lot of what i see from
your side
oh only half only half no falls
right right now anyway i mean i i just
don't get it it's like
that's like insane a marathon is like
what 25 miles
so yeah i mean i do i do exercise but
that is insane to be honest like to just
go out
and really do that so like i i commend
your commitment
to be honest to go out and do it uh
every single day
well well thanks i appreciate it i don't
think i'm gonna do a full marathon
anytime soon but
i'll stick i'll stick to the house um
okay let me ask you this
this will be the uh the question we we
end on unless anyone else has any
last-minute questions
put them in the comments um otherwise
we'll close here soon shortly
um what advice would you give
to someone who wants to get started with
data maybe specifically get started with
data visualization
yeah awesome awesome so um i get this
question
again and again especially since uh the
visualization came out like
just i probably got hundreds of people
just messaging me
how do you how do you like become a data
analyst and what to get into
um i really think that i mean as far as
data visualization is concerned if we
just talk about that
i really think that it's not so much
about the tool that you need to learn i
mean
tools are tools they were created by
human beings with the same brains that
we have
so if you learn a tool it's pretty easy
to pick up to be honest especially
tableau
i mean i wouldn't even recommend doing a
tutorial from
youtube or something like that if you
just download tableau and
you start you know dragging and dropping
things you're honestly going to get it
within a week
so hold on hold on hold on no tutorial
open tableau upload data and start
clicking
yeah i love it i love that exact simple
and it's just
i mean when i say a lot or i try to say
a lot on my page is personal projects
and just do stuff like like stop like
trying to figure out how to do something
and just do the thing and just see
learn along your way okay sorry keep
keep going okay so you'd say open up
tableau just start doing things
i mean that that i mean i think garyvee
also says that that you just need to
pull the trigger
like people focus way too much on uh
okay i need to craft like a study plan
how do i do this
what are the best courses one of the
sources when a lot of that time could
just be spent
doing the thing itself and if you just
open up tableau
and you just start visualizing you just
drag and drop click you'll eventually
start to get it so it's not so much
about the tool like you can put the tool
to the side what
really matters is just having that
data-driven mindset
right so if you're in data and you look
around your life and you look what's
happening in the world
right what can you visualize you know
what can you do like what is something
that really
is meaningful to you that you can really
visualize and
once you get that curiosity and to be
honest it's not hard to get you just
really have to start with a question
it just all starts with a question right
almost all my visualizations it always
just started with
okay what is this why is that how can i
do this
right it always starts with a question
and as long as you start with that
the end result is always an amazing
visualization
to be honest and i really think that
that's the only thing that you
uh need to focus on that you know start
with a question
be curious and then just go on to
visualize it and i think that
uh you'll probably make a huge impact on
the world with just that simple uh tool
in your toolkit i mean isn't that what
you did
yeah exactly
you didn't think about it too much you
just put some data in tableau
and then made a graph and then shared it
and then yeah impact right
that's that's exactly again back to that
story
my four-year-old cousin literally just
clicks and dragged and dropped and made
a bar grab so i mean
if she can do it then i mean why can't
you you know or why can't anyone else
yeah for sure okay last question for you
um yeah what what advice would you give
to someone
like just in life not necessarily data
related but just like
what is like a mantra or a quote that
you like to live by or just like a
lifestyle that you
you live by man that's uh
that's definitely a question um
i think in life if it was in life advice
i really
think that uh you
just need to give your maximum
effort in whatever you do um
and and and that is essentially what the
essence of the human spirit is you know
um just giving maximum effort staying
into it until
you know your last breath you know don't
give up until your last breath you know
and i don't mean to say that in terms
like of a motivational speech i actually
agree
with that because a lot of the things
that i've done in life and a lot of the
things that i've achieved
it's always uh been driven by this
need to give my maximum effort my need
to
do something i mean uh it's because of
that effort that you know
uh i never even thought that i would
make to visit the date
but it happened in like two months but i
thought it would happen in a year
so for a lot of other people uh whatever
their goals are
right it it could really happen if you
really just
go out and do it right no excuses i mean
just
again going back to like gary vaynerchuk
where like his
super fans um just just go out get it
done put in the maximum
effort or like the best effort that you
can and i really think that
your life will start to change or the
world around you would start to change
if you just uh you know access that core
element of your
you know your human spirit to you know
go out and you know make something of
yourself in this life i love that you
only have
you only have one life so might as well
give
you know the best effort you have while
you're here right
yeah yeah that's true awesome okay well
what about me
yeah i mean now i'm like i'll sign
because you've reversed the question
back on me but i asked the question
um i i mean i like i like max effort i
think i think that's
that's a good one i like just do stuff
like i'd rather
like rather just do stuff than like
think about it like
um the other one that i i think
that is important to me is like i mean
there's
there's a lot but one that i try to live
is just be kind you know just
whoever whoever you meet like whoever
you meet on the internet
um like we talked a lot about um the
subreddit
our uh data is beautiful
and yeah it's an awesome subreddit but
reddit is so
toxic like it is insane like how rude
and
i don't know it's just easy to be rude
on the internet when especially when
you're
um i can never say that word anonymous
um so i i think just being kind gets you
a long way and just makes you
you know it makes you a lot happier in
the end run so that that's mine
um i'll i'll cut the cheese here and uh
i'll uh we'll go ahead and wrap this up
i want to thank rashaan
so much for being with us he is um
11 hours ahead of me and i'm in central
time so
it just it just turned 8 30. so he's
been up since like
6 30 this morning bright and early on
tuesday morning uh getting ready for
this and making sure our mics and video
were working
so thank you so much for for joining us
for sean we really appreciate it
no i really appreciate it honestly it's
been an honor talking to
not only you because i really think that
um
a lot of the things you do on linkedin
especially i really think that you're
a brilliant guy in your field and i
really think that you're like
um i as i said before i think i
commented on ethan's
uh comment that you know you're going to
be the voice for
2021 when it comes to data
so thanks i don't know about that but i
appreciate it
so it's an honor to be here and more
importantly it's also an honor to
um talk to a lot of the viewers who got
a lot of response from it and
i'm nothing but grateful
yeah yeah i just want to quickly
highlight
um a bunch of people that were on ethan
nelson i mean we've got an hour and a
half so
ethan nelson gave us a lot of really
good comments appreciative of him
um let's see who else um derek
uh raider mike macker sorry i said that
wrong he left a lot of really good
comments
um kaival left a lot of really good
comments
derek derek cisco and ryan collins left
a lot of really good comments
really appreciate all their insights and
uh i know dustin was here for a long
time
and and mandeep helping us uh helping us
out with
with uh questions for for rashaan and
and just helping the community
there was actually a really cool post
and i i think i don't even know who this
is from because sometimes linkedin
doesn't show who it's from but a
linkedin user says community for the win
heart and uh i feel like we had a great
experience with with that tonight
yeah yeah there's the kindness right
there to live by
yeah yeah exactly exactly so thanks to
everyone who watched elmer
and and daniel and uh some meet thank
you guys for
for joining appreciate it and thanks
again rashaan
really enjoyed this time talking to you
and yeah super excited to see
what the graph looks like in 2021 and
also just see
where you end up and i'm sure we'll uh
where can people find you best your
linkedin
is that the best place to reach you uh
yeah that's the best place
uh linkedin uh rashaan khan
okay uh you could just uh search it um
this year i
be diversifying my voice i think i'm
going to also start being more active
on uh twitter um
yeah so these are the best places uh
that you can uh
find me at twitter or linkedin basically
mainly it's linkedin so you and trump
both will be spending more time on
twitter next year just kidding
um with that yeah so with that
follower sean bright future excited to
see what happens and for the rest of you
guys
well most you guys hopefully i'll be
able to see you on wednesday night we'll
be doing
uh another live session on my channel
where i'll be talking about my my visits
not really my business i didn't make
most of them but my collection of data
vis
in 2020 on my instagram and what i
learned so hopefully
um i'll catch you guys there on
wednesday and if not thanks for joining
and uh
we'll we'll catch you guys later thanks
everyone
thank you yeah

Title: Programming "Mario Party" in Python

Description: Creating a simple version of Mario Party

Video Transcript:
[Music]
I see me now
sorry about that hopefully that should
work now I have my built-in microphone
working
hear me now
I have my okay so sorry about that sorry
we're starting a 1 minute late I'm glad
that you guys could join in for those
who are new my name is avery Smith I am
a programmer with Exxon Mobil I'm
getting my masters in data science right
now from Georgia Tech as well this is
just an introductory class to Python I'm
just trying to do some fun things during
the quarantine for kovat that might be
entertaining so instead of just like
going to what exercises are just
learning the basics of Python I thought
it would be fun to do some like fun
games to do during Python so we have
people all over taking this course some
college students some older some
elementary school students so I'm gonna
try to make this applicable to all of
you guys if I possibly can and I hope
that it's you find it useful if nothing
else it's just a chance to be exposed to
to Python and learn some more about it
so I'm in the chats so you guys you guys
need help with anything in the chats
feel free to type it in I am on a slight
delay when I'm broadcaster you guys so
it might take me a second to get you
there but hopefully everything is
working in there and if it's not feel
free to tell me I'll try to help you
guys as much as I can with your
individual work you guys can't send me
emails I'll show you how to do that so
we'll go ahead and get started by
opening a Python IDE place where you can
write Python in a computer can interpret
it so what I'm actually on I'm gonna
make myself small in this right-hand
corner so what I'm actually using last
class we used repel it
and I haven't found anything that's like
that much better so I'm going to go
ahead and paste that into the chat
hopefully you guys able to see that and
hopefully you guys are able to see that
I have it pulled up right here on my
screen I'll go ahead and I'm gonna make
sorry I noticed that there's to be a
little bit of small let's see yeah
alright nobody see my whole screen I'm
gonna go ahead and hit this new repo
over here and choose a Python and give
it a name so I'm going to call this what
are we doing today Mario Party okay so
I'm creating that account so once again
that's just repel dot I T if you guys
just search repel Python on Google it
should pull it up but I put the link in
the corner and then once you once you
get there you want to hit new repel and
choose Python and give it a name and I'm
not gonna do that sorry alright did that
but hopefully you guys are able to get
that far and it pulls up this page and
for those who were with me last week we
learned that on the left hand side we
have code that we write instructions to
the computer and then on the right hand
side and this black section is where the
computer actually acts on our code so
today we're gonna be trying to build
Mario Party I'm gonna pull up what a
mario party is go fast so if you haven't
played Mario Party before it's a game
from Nintendo you know it's really old I
don't know the latest one is maybe like
eight or something like that now it's
very similar to monopoly I'm not super
familiar with all the rules so we're
gonna kind of play a simple version of
it today where basically you have a
board and characters and you roll a dice
and you're trying to get to a final
destination that's kind of the goal and
we're going to do a simple version of it
but it should be pretty fun I'm gonna be
doing this for the first time
so it might take a little bit of an
iterative process but I hope that I do
that kind of on purpose because
programming is really iterative and it
takes a lot of googling and it takes a
lot of airs so hopefully you'll be able
to enjoy it and have fun
the first thing I'm gonna do is just
write out the instructions in this
browser for us the writers to understand
I told everyone last time that if if
you're writing in Python a computer has
to be able to read it in Python if you
don't want the computer to read it in
Python you have to write it on this page
with hash tags in front of it anything
with the hashtag is commented out and
the computer won't read it so in this
instance I'm going to be writing the
instructions to the game simple mario
party game so in mario party since we
write mario party game and so when i
suggest you guys doing at home is maybe
having me on 1/2 the screen and then
typing on the other half of the screen
that way you guys can kind of see what
i've type and then copy it down so the
so - mario party there's a few things
you have these characters like Mario or
Luigi Bowser or peach Daisy and these
characters I guess you're gonna have
everyone's going to start here start at
a home base so everyone's gonna start
let's let's go back to the pictures
Mario Party it's very similar to a board
game perfect for in one place so in this
case everyone's starting here and the
ultimate goal is we're gonna we're gonna
simplify it I know this isn't exactly
how it plays he's played out but the
ultimate goal is to have the most stars
at the end to the most points you get
points by traveling from for instance
the starting space to like an ending
space and picking up things on the way
we're just going to kind of make it a
race
to start off and we'll see how far we
get today we may add stars and trapdoors
and different bonuses just depending on
how far how quickly we go so we're gonna
have this board so we have to create a
board you know that's a thing we have to
do so start at a home base and then
we're gonna have we'll call it a journey
path so where are all of the characters
going to go cuz you can see in this
image you can go up here and then left
and then over the bridge and stuff like
that once again ours will be much more
simple only b2b as well so you have to
create journey paths create journey
paths I want to make sure we create a
home base or a finish line so we have
somewhere for our people to go at the
end and then we have to do create roles
so the way it works in Mario Party is
you you roll a dice and that dice
determines how many spaces you move
forward so that's basically all we'll
need to do and then finally we'll have
to determine determine winners okay so
that's what we're planning I'm doing I
hope that sounds good and I hope that's
straightforward I hope that here you're
caught up and if you have any questions
feel free to put them in the chat I'm
watching the chat periodically I'm happy
to help one thing you can do if you get
stuck I know we have some people get
stuck last time is you can actually
invite me to your to your board so you
can if you invite me to this I can look
at your code individually if you get
stuck and try to troubleshoot it so I
think if you just type in here Avery
data let's see yeah apparently I can
find me that's my name though or you can
do my email which is Avery J s at
gmail.com so I'll go ahead and throw
that in the chat just in case you guys
you guys are smart I can also
troubleshoot in the chat if you can tell
me as well
alright so let's get started so the way
I want to get started is we're going to
list out our characters so let's start
with four four characters there's toad
as well let's do mario care I always
thought about four o'clock characters
let's see oh this is in YouTube um I'll
let you guys choose what characters you
want what characters do you guys want to
include we're gonna list them right now
put them in the chat so I'm gonna vote
for Mario one vote for alright but you
guys can choose go ahead and the chat
tell me who you want to include in this
game and we're gonna create a simple
list so we're gonna call characters list
we're gonna fill that list with strings
of character names that are gonna be in
a game let's choose maybe four or so and
we'll get busy okay the next thing I
want to do is we actually want to import
some libraries so some libraries I know
we're going to use I've actually just
can put this at the top
import libraries slash modulus now what
these are all right we got some people
voting
you got a Diddy Kong we got a boom boom
I don't even know who boom bloom is so I
have to figure that out
got Diddy Kong though that's a good vote
okay so back to the module c python
comes with a lot of built-in modules but
doesn't have all the moms as you
possibly eat it to have i'm so what you
can do is load in some new ones by
typing import and I know I'm gonna need
numpy that's a math module it's gonna
help us do some of our random stuff I'm
gonna change the name of numpy to NP
just so I don't have to write the whole
tux plots limp I plot as Yeltsin what
this is is pythons like most basic
defaults plotting structure
so it's going to be really easy and
really nice for us to plot stuff
eventually I'm gonna just run that
actually would see the characters list
let's look at the boat we had boom boom
Diddy Kong and waluigi all right so
that's our boats you guys didn't vote
you guys but like these people it's only
because you didn't vote right so we have
mario diddy kong oops
and so once again these are strings
you're just putting them in with a
single quotation Diddy Kong wah Luigi
now I remember this boom boom guys let's
see if I can find that out boom boom
Mario back go ahead and try to run this
and see if it gives us any heirs alright
sorry I do that real fast so many over
four characters did it run okay it looks
like it ran but nothing happened okay
and that actually reminds me in order to
see that this stuff's running and make
sure our codes working why don't we add
instructions here like we did last time
and do some prints so let's let's call
print as a way that you just push text
on to the terminal for that Python so
I'm just gonna do print I'm gonna call
this Mario Party in Python alright and
then I'm gonna say print simple board
game creation of popular game Mario
Party players yeah that's gonna fit and
that's a crime just so I can see that my
code is actually running I like it to be
make it to be and it looks like it is so
so far so good
okay so we've created this characters
list and I can I can print out maybe
I'll print
characters I spell it alright I always
felt wrong alright looks good characters
maybe I'll do that and then maybe I do
an intern I understand type in print
characters list and you saw it popped up
I could just hit tab so I'm gonna go
ahead and run all right nice so printed
out my characters of Mario did he come
on while Luigi and blue perfect great
off to a good start
any questions so far hopefully I'm going
at a good pace if not you go ahead and
tell me in the comments on the right
hand side and I'll keep moving on
alright so start at a home base so what
we're going to do is we're going to use
matplotlib as our plotting for our game
board so we're gonna do is make a game
board and what I kind of want this with
this game board to look like I'll draw
on this white board so you can see is
well maybe I'll draw all right so sorry
no not ideal but something like that
just kind of a rectangular path for the
characters to go on so what I'm gonna do
is I'm actually gonna use and now I'm
doing this real time so you guys can
learn how I would learn how to do this
is I'm gonna go into I don't have to
draw lines right so I'm going to do
drawing lines in matte block slip okay
all right how to draw a line with map
flop Stack Overflow
is a really good resource a lot of
coding is just he's just putting just
googling things and finding it Stack
Overflow is a really good resource
I saw a comment you never said put the
code down oh yeah so something I should
say is I'm hitting a I'm hitting Enter
on all of these each line of code only
is on one line so make sure you press
ENTER in between all your different
statements sorry that was
and make sure that there are no spaces
so for instance if I put a space here
and hit run it's going to fail because
Python isn't likes to have spaces so
make sure all of your spaces are on the
left-hand side and those and then to the
together okay so now I'm gonna make
myself smaller again cuz I'm doing less
explanation all right so now we're gonna
get these get these lines so for
instance this is a really good line
right where it just drew straight right
here but actually the way I want the way
I want to think about it is I want to
have a grid okay
and in this plot grid I'm going to have
space 1 1 for instance let's draw it on
this real fast so 1 1 all right so
there's 1 1 and then I'm gonna move it
up to 2 1 all right and then 2 3 1 like
that okay and each one of those is going
to be part of my path but I want all of
those to be connected but I also want
them to be one step so that when we roll
we know how many places to go so I'm
gonna go ahead and I'm going to create a
list of X's and Y's that I'm going to
plot so that I can make this so each one
of these is a step so we have a step in
the yet I'm gonna call in the horizontal
Direction X and step in the vertical
direction Y okay so x and y so the first
I'm going to start every one star at 1 1
in this gray okay so that means the X is
1 and the y this one ok and then I want
to go let's go straight up so X stays 1
and Y goes to 2 okay so let's just start
right there I'm a kind of I'm kind of
cheating because I'm making my my home
base in my journey path all in the same
stack so I'm gonna actually just for
clarity's sake kind of put these in the
same section okay so
move that up there alright so now I have
these two two data points there's two
data points
I just want to plot this okay so I'm
going to do is just do Quixote plot X&Y
okay so PLT was what we pulled in
earlier this matplotlib dot pi plot
which is like the simplest Python
plotting platform out there really
simple I know it was better once we
could use but we're starting at easy and
I'm just calling that library
I'm calling the plot function so if you
use a library and the dot it gives you
all of the functions available so for
instance PLT dot i can look at all of
these I can scroll down and see all the
different functions so I know it's plots
is the one I want to use so here's a
couple and it even tells you how to how
to do everything right here I'm going to
plot X comma Y well that's going to do
is plot the X's against the Y's
all right and then the last thing you
have to do is do PLT dot show what's
gonna do is show the ground okay I've
actually never used repellant to show
graphs so I'm hoping that'll work and it
did it so that's not good
okay so what I'm gonna do instead is I'm
going to do PLT and now this one works
is save big okay what that does is it
saves the graph instead so maybe we
won't display we'll save it like I said
I don't use repellent ever
this is website I only use it to teach
just because I think it's a good
teaching place so I'm not super
experienced with it you can save let's
just call it the the map as a PNG if you
do that it should pop up on the select
hand side so let's see if that works all
right
we have this file popped up and let's
see if we can look at it nice okay
so perfect like I said we have
um this graph where it goes from one to
two which is exactly what we want
okay now let's say we wanted to alright
this is do I have everyone that far ask
if anyone else has any questions just
because it's gonna get that's not more
complicated but a little bit a little
bit more hopefully everyone has this so
far I'll go ahead and just throw this in
the in the text just in case you were
behind you can just copy and paste this
into the there's a character limit
I will not copy and paste add in I could
potentially potentially invite you or
share it I guess actually if you go to
you should be able to see my page I
guess if you have oh okay
James you're stuck okay well what air
are you getting James if you want to
copy and paste the air into the chat
that'd be awesome
otherwise you can invite me to view it
and I can look at or know fast you can
invite me by adding my email down here
or copy and pasting this link into the
chat either way and I could take a look
at it if you are stuck
I would encourage make sure that all of
you guys have no spaces in front of any
of your lines or that the make sure you
have parentheses on all of your prints
so all prints have a start and end
parenthesis make sure your list has
square brackets a start and square
bracket um those are cheap things really
easy to mess up on happens to me all the
time I'm gonna just check my email just
in case any of you guys sent me an email
how did you access the graph after
engine line 22 I'll show that again I'm
Steven on so once you've done line 22 it
should be
created a PNG a picture file it should
be saved in your directory inside of a
pellet and so it should be up here in
the top left corner underneath your main
PI there should be a file called map PNG
and I just clicked on right here and it
looks like you can probably delete it or
you can download it to your computer
it's not that cool yet so I would
download again and I just realized this
is gonna be a little bit more
complicated but it's okay we can do it
because I'm just confused on how this
works okay that's understandable
James I'll give a little bit more of an
explanation Python knows the certain
language your computer knows it's
language Python I guess I should say and
there are certain key elements that tell
the computer to understand mm-hmm what
do I understand so for instance it knows
that whenever you put prints I'm just
going to print over here hello it knows
to print that if I just do prints hello
it fails because it's not a string so
anything that has parentheses with the
quotations will print other functions so
print is a built-in function within
Python other things like for instance X
if we defined X which is a list as two
numbers 1 and 1 so these are the two X
numbers if I say X 1 and 1 I guess that
worked because it's a tuple that's too
complicated but if I do x equals 1 1
that makes it a list and now I can look
at my list and I see it there okay so
James is there anything specifically you
want you need a little bit more into or
if there is something specifically I'm
happy to go offline about it as well
hopefully that clears some things up the
other thing I want to clear up is these
libraries these libraries are just like
extra Python functions that are just
sleep just download from from
Python Python doesn't include them
initially because it included all of
them it would be a really big file and
so these are like add-ons modular
add-ons you can put all into Python and
you can use those functions to do more
complicated things ok so this point I
think I'm going to move on and I'm gonna
make our third point so right now we
have let me draw this a little bit
better so on our grid we we have we have
this point right here the start ok
that's 1 1 and then 1 2 is right here ok
so this is on a grid remember this is 1
1 this is 1 2 our next point but then
it's going to be on the second point of
the x-axis so we have to - next ok
I don't know if that's backwards for you
guys it probably is and I'm sorry but
there is a we're going to make this just
trust me on this our next point is 2 -
ok I'm gonna go ahead and run this and
save this the figure again just rerun
everything and take a look at ok so now
see we have from 1 from 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 2
ok so we're off to making our journey
start and this is taking a little bit
longer than I thought so I'm gonna try
to speed up a little bit what I'm going
to do it really fast is do I'm gonna do
a Google search because I can't remember
I do this in all honesty so matplotlib
set X access limits be the biggest
number is 10 and in both directions just
so it looks more like a board game map
so I'm just gonna click on this usually
if you google a question if you frame it
right the first one will be pretty
useful okay and this works perfectly I
just need to set so here's the PLT
library that we've been using there's a
function called X limit and Y limit
right here
and you set the minimum and the maximum
so I'm going to do just copy and paste
this into actually I write it out
because I know you guys have to write it
out right PLT x-l I am there it is
alright the minimum I want is zero and
the maximum I want is ten okay I'm gonna
do the same thing for the Y access
limits to zero ten all right so now if I
regrab this if I hit run green
run-button at the top and recheck the
graph left-hand side over here you can
see that I still have the same plot of
one one one two two two but now the
graph is a little bit bigger okay does
that make sense so now what I'm going to
do is just kind of continue to add on to
my map it doesn't really necessarily
matter how you add on to your map you
can kind of create your own map at this
point of whatever you want however
whatever directions you want I would
move in increments of square increments
of one just because it's going to be
easier but we can make it look however
we want so I'm going to make mine go
straight two more times so straight in
that X direction so I added two more
twos oh wait no actually that would be
three and four because I'm moving in the
X direction the Y direction is holding
constant at two so now I should go up I
should go right one right two right
three
Oh perfect lazy son I'm glad this makes
perfect sense I'm glad to hear this um
so here we go I hit run I'm in the
top-left corner again check out my graph
so I went up one right one rights to
rights through okay perfect so now I
have this little bit of this map okay
and just for simplicity's sake we could
make this really complicated but I'm
looking at the clock where 11:30 we want
to finish within an hour we haven't even
gotten to the characters yet this is a
big part though so totally understand
it's taking a while this is kind of the
the main part I guess you could say so
we have this path right I'm gonna make
mine go up now so I'm gonna keep the
x-axis up for I'm going to make the
y-axis at 3
let's do that two times I think so then
the Y has to go to four so I'm just
incrementing one each time I state step
up step right step up step right okay
now so I've gone up to maybe I want to
go right to now so my X is gonna get
bigger
five six and my Y since it's just going
flatline it's gonna stay the same so
four and four okay and let's go up a
little bit more let's go two more five
six just really it doesn't really matter
what your graph is going to look like so
if you don't do it exactly like mine
that's that's fine I'm making my graph
kind of just simple like up right up
right should I go to go down yeah well
maybe we'll go all the way up to ten
here I also won't have too many turns
okay
so to be honest that looks fine for
right now it doesn't have to look if we
are going really we've really hardened I
want to make it look really cool and
intricate but that's that's fine for me
so instead of going all the way to ten
and ten maybe I'll go to I went up to
six so going up to seven is probably
enough so I'm just suggesting these to
make me the accesses not go up all the
way to ten so just to make my board look
kind of full
yeah so here's my here's my boy okay I'm
actually going to teach you guys new
things a PLT you have this this plot now
in May if you there's another function
called title you can add a title in here
so I'm gonna call it Avery
well I'll call it mario party mario
party game okay
and it runs this is once again just a
string it's inside single quotes titles
the function that has parentheses prints
I'm gonna run okay look at the graph
there's my title awesome it's coming
together guys
now yeah okay so now what I want to do
is is I want to plot so okay here's
that's the journey path let's let's call
it the journey path I'm actually gonna
change the name to original journey path
okay that's what we're gonna be starting
with oh but actually before that let's
create the start and the finish line so
I guess what I want I was trying to tell
you guys earlier will start up in base
so starting at home base what does that
mean so that means I want to show where
we're starting which is one one so what
I'm gonna do is I'm actually going to do
PLT dot and instead of plot this time
I'm going to use this thing called
tweeze plot my abilities plot let's try
to plot real fast plot X okay but we
don't want to plot the entire list of
X's for the entire list of Y's
I only want to plot we already plotted
this we want to plot the first ones and
they want to make like a green starting
place okay so in Python to say I want
the first part of that element you
actually use square bracket 0 okay so I
want the first X and the first Y okay
and in here you can say I think color
equals green all right I don't know if
it's gonna work so bear with me let's
test it out all right it ran with no
problems I don't see any red errors so
I'm going to check and I notice I
changed the name to original journey
path okay and that didn't work so don't
do that
sorry change plot to scatter scatter
allows for one one unit at a time and I
wonder let me see if I can do that again
scatter and see how it takes in this see
so that stands for color so I'm just
gonna do C equals great and let's see if
that works oh and it doesn't know oh I
spelt scatter off make sure you spell
scattered right all right let's try
again all right check original journey
path nice to see a weight of this green
line or this green dot right here that's
exactly what we wanted that's showing
the starting place okay we also want to
show the finish line right so I'm just
going to actually copy this down here
and so this is zero zero
the first point in the list negative 1
and negative 1 will get us the last
point the finish line and maybe we want
to make this yellow okay so we have
we're gonna plot the start important
green in the finish point and yellow or
should be red no cuz Mario's gonna be
right back
all right so let's click run it's yellow
because it's supposed to be gold you
know like a star in the game alright and
there's our star at the end ok those are
kind of small so what I'm gonna go in
and here is type in and see how it's
gonna give me these options right here I
think I can do s equals I don't know 10
let's try that
and that's equals 10 S stands for sides
okay
Oh perfect Joseph s already asked this
question sorry justice I didn't seem to
your question and you're already on the
right track
yeah this s equals 10 should change the
sides if I remember correctly so let's
test it out all right check our graph
and okay I think the doc got smaller
right the dot size change but it was but
now we look at it and it's bigger it's
bigger but still as big as I'd like it
to be honest so I'm gonna make it 100
all right all right to be honest I'd
still like it about twice as that size
programming is an iterative process so
you gotta you gotta figure out uh it's
just part of it you just that's how you
learn is by try all right that's good
it's no starting place and finish place
okay perfect so now and we saved the
picture all right so that's our that's
our ginger oh wait but now we have to I
want you to plot the characters plot
characters okay so all the characters so
first off
alright I'm gonna teach you guys how to
do this the more efficient way it might
be it might be hard but if you copy my
code you should be fine so when in doubt
you can pause it just write down my code
okay so we're gonna plot the characters
as dots actually you know what we should
do is well have the characters be dots
Matt flaw LED marker type is what I'm
gonna look for and you can actually
change what the dot is you can change it
to like for instance we have it's
defaulting to a circle but maybe we want
it to be triangle okay so I'm gonna use
the triangle for both of them now and
the thing to do that by doing a comma
then I'm looking I see that it has
marker equals none right there so when
you marker equals quote shift six gives
it a little caret I'm gonna copy that
and you guys don't do that I'm just
trying to make it look a little
different than the characters go that
way okay now we're going to plot the
character list but first we have to
decide what colors our characters are
going to be okay so let's look at
matplotlib so I'm googling again Matt
plot live colors
that's um you can do any color you want
with with the right hacks or or binary
but we want you know stated the easy
colors so I'm using green and yellow
right now doesn't oh yeah Mario is gonna
be red okay so what I'm gonna do is
create another list okay so I'm gonna
call it the color list square brackets
okay and I'm gonna create the in strings
I got 20 minutes you guys you can get
pretty fun 20 minutes the color list is
going to be I'm going to do I'm looking
at the list up here we have Mario first
so we're gonna make Mario red because of
course he's red if we had more time we'd
make Diddy come around but for now I'll
make him blue I guess
okay blue will make coos next while
Luigi he can be purple right is that the
purple one
wha Luigi oh yeah he's purple
alright so do we have a purple color but
jente perfect magenta and the last one
was boom boom he's kind of brown yellow
probably it would be best but we're
going to make him black forever
okay okay
so that's our color list for our
characters okay so now we want to add
our characters onto our page okay so
what I'm gonna do is I'm going to do a
for loop
why don't you know I'll do for you don't
make it complicated you're running out
of time so we want to do is PLT plot and
we're gonna do actually actually we're
gonna scatter this the same thing right
here as we did for the green Homebase
cuz everyone's starting there right
everyone's starting at home but instead
we'll do color list in the zeroeth
because once again to get that first
element python the weird it starts at
zero so I'm gonna I'm gonna paint Mario
okay and that's gonna be him because
it's going to read the size we're gonna
make smaller maybe 50 and the marker
instead of the carrot we're gonna make
it a circle okay so we're going to do
the same thing for all of the characters
now 1 2 3 4 but the color is gonna
change 1 2 3
okay those are characters 1 2 3 4 but if
we do this and I'm gonna go ahead and
hit run hopefully you guys are able to
follow that now go ahead and hit run
hopefully have no errors no errors and
it'll be saved here here's the problem
it saved all of them and it's hard to
see here let me see if I can zoom in
yeah okay still kind of hard to see but
it printed all of the circles on top of
each other on top of the triangle so we
can't really see all the unique colors
okay so what I'm gonna do is just do a
little hack where I'm gonna get we're
going to Google it real fast get it
random number between 0 & 1 PI this
going to add a little bit to where I
plopped them so that you can see them
okay that didn't work you're right on
this between all this typing back and
you negative 5 and we will choose the
city so how did generate random numbers
in Python all right so let's see so okay
so here's like generating between 0 & 1
which we could work and then subtract 1
that could work should we do that we'll
be back because i know i did the other
way but it's just a little bit of just a
little bit longer time so back up the
libraries i'm going to do import random
dr. andum I think that what that was
using you see random random okay
actually we just import random okay so
I'm going to speed through this just cuz
we have 15 minutes so feel free to ask
questions afterwards and email me or or
message me in some way if you wanna go
over something more specific I'm just
gonna make sure this works right here
random random and if I do that it should
give me a 0 or 1 okay perfect so now I'm
gonna do I'm just gonna take that phrase
instead I'm just gonna add a little bit
random random so I'm just adding a
little bit in the x and y direction to
try to offset them so they're not like
on top of each other
oops sorry so just adding it to
each X and each Y okay hit run all right
now it's like it the guy okay see this
is what I was kind of afraid of is it it
subtracts so we have red you have Mario
and then one who's then swallow eg and
then whom is this Diddy Kong and then
boom boom and I added one to them but
are 0 1 but kind of moved everything
over to the right quite a bit so that's
kind of why I wanted a number between 0
& 1 or sorry negative 5 and 25 it
would've made that a little bit nicer
but just because I'm running out of time
I'm just going to just gonna kind of
accept it cuz I do want to get to this
last section in the last 13 minutes okay
we did all this work we have a board the
next thing I want to do is is start
playing all right so we're gonna do is
we're gonna choose a number so how big
is our dice I'm just gonna type in roll
a dice pipe I could do this from scratch
but I'm trying to show you I don't like
that page actually some of you don't
choose the first thing choose it
differently dice rolling simulator and
pipeline project because that's what it
is in in Python alright so this is the
function right here I see what I'm gonna
be using random brand int between 1 and
6 okay we'll make we'll make our dice
we'll just call it dice size we make it
variable we'll start with will start 6
or should make it four
we'll make it four just smell amazing
okay so then this is going to create a
random number from 1 to the number the
size of our dice okay and what we're
going to do is do a loop kind
so we're gonna start let's start with
Mario start with Mario okay so if you're
starting with Mario Mario is gonna roll
the dice we'll call it Mario dice equals
and it's gonna be a number between 1 and
6 in distance okay so now what we're
going to do is Mario
instead of being instead of being where
he was originally and maybe all won't
we'll just do it this way instead of
being where he was originally which was
right here right this is this is Mario I
starting at 0 0 or 1 1 basically he's
going to be instead of him to 0 than 0
it he's now going to be in the the Mario
dice position because he just rolled
right so that's star with Mario first
roll okay all right Joseph said can use
ramp in function on the characters
almost Joseph that's a really good
observation there's a there's a function
for it let me see if I can find it for
the heck of it random dot here and you
can't do ran 2 inch because int means
integer let's see negative 0.5 to 2500
let's see random land a random sorry
let's try negative 0.5 2.5 let's see
flowers oh yeah test it out no didn't
like that I know there's a way I camera
right now but that's a good question
Joseph you can't do Rand int because
we'll just try just a show
and because it's not integer integers
are whole numbers 1.5 but that's a
really good question
alright so now we roll the dice for
Mario and we've plotted his new position
let's save it as Mario's first move
don't put a apostrophe unless you put a
slash in front of it but to be honest
don't put an apostrophe it's just gonna
say it's just a dumb Python thing dope '
in this dream alright so let's see
alright so now I have the original
journey path right this is where
everyone started once again they're
starting here despite what this looks
like it's just so I could see the dots
not the best way of doing it okay now oh
I should print out we should print out
on a lot
let's do this oh wait I hit back
hopefully everything's safe I meant to
go here all right we're good I'll say
umm so let's now that Mario made his
first move let's say that Mario main is
facing it in the title let's put it back
for right now we can make an annotation
if we had more time but we have eight
minutes left so I'm trying to get done
all right so Mario first move rolled and
then I'm going to do plus STR to turn
into a string of the type in Mario dice
okay so that's gonna make the title what
Mario rolled so what's your Mario roll
and this time will be different
each time you do it it's a different
scenario because it's random right all
right let's see all right it ran maras
first move oh he only roll the one so
that means he just moved up to sheer
then it's reap lauding I'm here it
doesn't look like he's not ahead of
everyone that's okay okay the next thing
we wanna do is who's next
let's do Diddy Kong alright so let's do
I'm just gonna copy this whole thing
put it down here when I do diticom okay
and we can call in I'm gonna say did D
Kong first move I'm gonna call it oh and
I actually realize I made a mistake
see how this is colourless zero steel
that means tomorrow one would be pretty
calm something that though I know we're
just at a time try to do this on
anything now I so I might have to come
back and refinish but Wow
so Mario rolled a six this time so that
would be one two three four five six so
he's all the way up here okay oh and it
looks like I forgot to save oh I'd save
does the same name I like did he come
first move why didn't that say
yeah run again sorry see what I didn't
say
Shh I think it should be sitting this I
thought let's see huh it's not saving I
totally don't know why first wall my
lord and you notice that we should erase
it if we had if we had more time
also not totally sure why this is it's
sitting here it could be some sort of
that issue with repel it I don't know
how much memory were allowed let's try
one more time yeah the summary is a
number of freshmen page let's see if
that helps
did it go on first move it's there now
so I just have to refresh my page so I
kind of a repel thing I guess
okay and then you can see did he
comments first move we're all the three
so let's see Mario's first Mario oh
there's another mistake see I keep
making mistakes it's an iterative
process because I'm printing out here
Diddy Kong's first move but I left as
Mario dices not as Diddy Kong's backs
I mean you put that in here and then
rerun so once again I hope you see they
even though I've been programming for a
while I still make matzo mistakes and I
have to check myself alright so here's
the original then Mario made the first
move only got a two so what 1/2 so
that's why there's the second red dot
right there Diddy Kong which is the
colors do become the blue world of one
and is actually right here so once again
I really need to fix the random part but
we're about at a time
we'll keep we'll keep doing it we'll do
one more iteration of everyone's roll
and then maybe we'll finish next week
next month
Diddy King rolls through waluigi we do a
loop normally but i don't want to throw
too much at you so we're just going to
do it by hand to start so we're doing a
waluigi dice so once again we're going
to move that much forward okay and then
do wha luigi first move thank for it
ok done so here is the original Mario's
first move
roll the to do t-cog our oldest six peg
dad did he come almost I've been winning
up here and then while Luigi Oh only
roll the one and it looks like I screwed
up again did I screw up guys
I sure did because I didn't change the
color list to two you know it should be
it too so I keep messing up we'll do one
more roll of blue moon
boom-boom-boom-boom
I'll just do boom how lazy they call it
a broom dice and we'll go ahead and
throw that there and we know what the
colors should change to the wheelie and
the boom dice needs to change
yeah all right
so original journey path looks like this
Mario's first move Wow Mario rolled the
six almost done then Diddy Kong rolled
to not bad
while Luigi also rolled the two now is
tied with Diddy Kong and boom boom
rolled a three so after after the first
roll Mario's in first then boom boom and
then waluigi into the top so you see I
would an ideal world I would then erase
these guys you know because obviously
mario can't be in two places at once
so I'd erase those guys and then go to
the next round once again of doing the
rolls and eventually you determine a
winner by saying that like we're gonna
keep track of this boom dice the next
turn when they roll we're gonna say boom
dice equals the old boom dice what they
rolled last time plus the the new this
new roll of the dice we keep adding up
until the boom dice or one of the
characters is greater than however many
of these we have 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
so whoever basically gets to 11 first
place so we didn't get that far
it's 12 o'clock I gotta get back to work
I know you guys have to get back to work
or get back to school so I'm gonna call
it good for today but I think next next
week we'll go ahead
finish this and make it look better and
make it work better I'll do some work
over the over the next week to actually
make sure that I fully know what I'm
doing so you guys don't want any airs if
you had airs today please please send me
an email send me a message say something
in the comments so that I can help you
I'm more than willing to look at your
code and help you troubleshoot also if
you want to learn more or you want
something specifically send me a message
put in the comments I'm willing to hear
from all of you once again I'm gonna be
doing this every Monday at 11 a.m. same
time just hoping to help someone have
fun
think not about the virus learn a new
skill helping kids stay entertained so
hopefully this was fun an uplifting
experience and sorry we didn't finish
we'll finish next week hopefully feel
free to try to finish on your own if you
do try you can email me and say hey is
this how you're gonna do it and stuff
like that and next week I think we'll go
ahead and and make it fun and make it a
little bit faster to code we'll go over
some heart of things so once again
really appreciate you guys tuning in and
hope you guys tune in next week feel
free to add anyone and by anyone you
want magic friends whoever yeah thank
you so much appreciate your time how
we're going

